========================================

TOM SWIFT AND HIS WAR TANK

or

Doing His Bit For Uncle Sam


By

VICTOR APPLETON




CONTENTS

     I  Past Memories
    II  Tom's Indifference
   III  Ned is Worried
    IV  Queer Doings
     V  "Is He a Slacker?"
    VI  Seeing Things
   VII  Up a Tree
  VIII  Detective Rad
    IX  A Night Test
     X  A Runaway Giant
    XI  Tom's Tank
   XII  Bridging a Gap
  XIII  Into a Trench
   XIV  The Ruined Factory
    XV  Across Country
   XVI  The Old Barn
  XVII  Veiled Threats
 XVIII  Ready for France
   XIX  Tom Is Missing
    XX  The Search
   XXI  A Prisoner
  XXII  Rescued
 XXIII  Gone
  XXIV  Camouflaged
   XXV  Foiled




Chapter I

Past Memories


Ceasing his restless walk up and down the room, Tom Swift strode to the
window and gazed across the field toward the many buildings, where
machines were turning out the products evolved from the brains of his
father and himself. There was a worried look on the face of the young
inventor, and he seemed preoccupied, as though thinking of something
far removed from whatever it was his eyes gazed upon.

"Well, I'll do it!" suddenly exclaimed Tom. "I don't want to, but I
will. It's in the line of 'doing my bit,' I suppose; but I'd rather it
was something else. I wonder--"

"Ha! Up to your old tricks, I see, Tom!" exclaimed a voice, in which
energy and friendliness mingled pleasingly.  "Up to your old tricks!"

"Oh, hello, Mr. Damon!" cried Tom, turning to shake hands with an
elderly gentleman--that is, elderly in appearance but not in action,
for he crossed the room with the springing step of a lad, and there was
the enthusiasm of youth on his face. "What do you mean--my old tricks?"

"Talking to yourself, Tom. And when you do that it means there is
something in the wind. I hope, as a sort of side remark, it isn't rain
that's in the wind, for the soldiers over at camp have had enough water
to set up a rival establishment with Mr. Noah. But there's something
going on, isn't there? Bless my memorandum book, but don't tell me
there isn't, or I shall begin to believe I have lost all my deductive
powers of reasoning! I come in here, after knocking two or three times,
to which you pay not the least attention, and find you mysteriously
murmuring to yourself.

"The last time that happened, Tom, was just before you started to dig
the big tunnel--No, I'm wrong. It was just before you started for the
Land of Wonders, as we decided it ought to be called. You were talking
to yourself then, when I walked in on you, and--Say, Tom!" suddenly
exclaimed Mr. Damon eagerly, "don't tell me you're going off on another
wild journey like that--don't!"

"Why?" asked Tom, smiling at the energy of his caller.

"Because if you are, I'll want to go with you, of course, and if I go
it means I'll have to start in as soon as I can to bring my wife around
to my way of thinking. The last time I went it took me two weeks to get
her to consent, and then she didn't like it. So if--"

"No, Mr. Damon," interrupted Tom, "I don't count on going on any sort
of a trip--that is, any long one. I was just getting ready to take a
little spin in the Hawk, and if you'd like to come along--"

"You mean that saucy little airship of yours, Tom, that's always trying
to sit down on her tail, or tickle herself with one wing?"

"That's the Hawk!" laughed Tom; "though that tickling business you
speak of is when I spiral. Don't you like it?"

"Can't say I do," observed Mr. Damon dryly.

"Well, I'll promise not to try any stunts if you come along," Tom went
on.

"Where are you going?" asked his friend.

"Oh, no place in particular. As you surmised, I've been doing a bit of
thinking, and--"

"Serious thinking, too, Tom!" interrupted Mr. Damon.  "Excuse me, but I
couldn't help overhearing what you said.  It was something about going
to do something though you didn't want to, and that it was part of your
'bit'. That sounds like soldier talk. Are you going to enlist, Tom?"

"No."

"Um! Well, then--"

"It's something I can't talk about, Mr. Damon, even to you, as yet,"
Tom said, and there was a new quality in his voice, at which his friend
looked up in some surprise.

"Oh, of course, Tom, if it's a secret--"

"Well, it hasn't even got that far, as yet. It's all up in the air, so
to speak. I'll tell you in due season. But, speaking of the air, let's
go for a spin. It may drive some of the cobwebs out of my brain. Did I
hear you say you thought it would rain?"

"No, it's as clear as a bell. I said I hoped it wouldn't rain for the
sake of the soldiers in camp. They've had their share of wet weather,
and, goodness knows, they'll get more when they get to Flanders. It
seems to do nothing but rain in France."

"It is damp," agreed Tom. "And, come to think of it, they are going to
have some airship contests over at camp to-day--for the men who are
being trained to be aviators, you know.  It just occurred to me that we
might fly over there and watch them."

"Fine!" cried Mr. Damon. "That's the very thing I should like. I'll
take a chance in your Hawk, Tom, if you'll promise not to try any
spiral stunts."

"I promise, Mr. Damon. Come on! I'll have Koku run the machine out and
get her ready for a flight to Camp. It's a good day for a jaunt in the
air."

"Get out the Hawk, Koku," ordered the young inventor, as he motioned to
a big man--a veritable giant--who nodded to show he understood. Koku
was really a giant, one of a race of strange beings, and Tom Swift had
brought the big man with him when he escaped from captivity, as those
will remember who have read that book.

"Going far, Tom?" asked an aged man, coming to the door of one of the
many buildings of which the shed where the airship was kept formed one.

"Not very far, Father," answered the young inventor.  "Mr. Damon and I
are going for a little spin over to Camp Grant, to see some aircraft
contests among the army birdmen."

"Oh, all right, Tom. I just wanted to tell you that I think I've gotten
over that difficulty you found with the big carburetor you were working
on. You didn't say what you wanted it for, except that it was for a
heavy duty gasolene engine, and you couldn't get the needle valve to
work as you'd like. I think I've found a way."

"Good, Dad! I'll look at it when I come back. That carburetor did
bother me, and if I can get that to work--well, maybe we'll have
something soon that will--"

But Tom did not finish his sentence, for Koku was getting the aircraft
in operation and Mr. Damon was already taking his place behind the
pilot's seat, which would be occupied by Tom.

"All ready, are you, Koku?" asked the young inventor.

"All ready, Master," answered the giant.

There was a roar like that of a machine gun as the Hawk's engine spun
the propeller, and then, after a little run across the sod, it mounted
into the air, carrying Tom and Mr. Damon with it.

"Mind you, Tom, no stunts!" called the visitor to the young inventor
through the speaking tube apparatus, which enabled a conversation to be
carried on, even above the roar of the powerful engine. "Bless my
overshoes! if you try, looping the loop with me--"

"I won't do anything like that!" promised Tom.

Away they soared, swift as a veritable hawk, and soon, after there had
unrolled below their eyes a succession of fields and forest, there came
into view rows and rows of small brown objects, among which beings,
like ants, seemed crawling about.

"There's the Camp!" exclaimed Tom.

"I see," and Mr. Damon nodded.

As they approached, they saw, starting up from a green space amid the
brown tents, what appeared to be big bugs of a dirty white color
splotched with green.

"The aircraft--and they have camouflage paint on," said Tom. "We can
watch 'em from up here!"

Mr. Damon nodded, though Tom could not see him, sitting in front of his
friend as he was.

Up and up circled the army aircraft, and they seemed to bow and nod a
greeting to the Hawk, which was soon in the midst of them. Tom and Mr.
Damon, flying high, though at no great speed, looked at the maneuvers
of the veterans and the learners--many of whom might soon be engaging
the Boches in far-off France.

"Some of 'em are pretty good!" called Tom, through the tube. "That one
fellow did the loop as prettily as I've ever seen it done," and Tom
Swift had a right to speak as one of authority.

Tom and his friend watched the aircraft for some time, and then started
off in a long flight, attaining a high speed, which, at first, made Mr.
Damon gasp, until he became used to it. He was no novice at flying, and
had even operated aeroplanes himself, though at no great height.

Suddenly the Hawk seemed to falter, almost as does a bird stricken by a
hunter's gun. The craft seemed to hang in the air, losing motion as
though about to plunge to earth unguided.

"What's the matter?" cried Mr. Damon.

"One of the control wires broken!" was Tom's laconic answer. "I'll have
to volplane down. Sit tight, there's no danger!"

Mr. Damon knew that with so competent a pilot as Tom Swift in the
forward seat this was true, but, nevertheless, he was a bit nervous
until he felt the smooth, gliding motion, with now and then an upward
tilt, which showed that Tom was coming down from the upper regions in a
series of long glides. The engine had stopped, and the cessation of the
thundering noise made it possible for Tom and his passenger to talk
without the use of the speaking tube.

"All right?" asked Mr. Damon.

"All right," Tom answered, and a little later the machine was rolling
gently over the turf of a large field, a mile or so from the camp.

Before Tom and Mr. Damon could get out of their seats, a man, seemingly
springing up from some hollow in the ground, walked toward them.

"Had an accident?" he asked, in what he evidently meant for a friendly
voice.

"A little one, easily mended," Tom answered.

He was about to take off his goggles, but at sight of the man's face a
change came over the countenance of Tom Swift, and he replaced the eye
protectors. Then Tom turned to Mr. Damon, as if to ask a question, but
the stranger came so close, evidently curious to see the aircraft at
close quarters, that the young inventor could not speak without being
overheard.

Tom got out his kit of tools to repair the broken control, and the man
watched him curiously. As he tinkered away, something was stirring
among the past memories of the inventor. A question he asked himself
over and over again was:

"Where have I seen this man before?  His face is familiar, but I can't
place him. He is associated with something unpleasant. But where have I
seen this man before?"




Chapter II

Tom's Indifference


"Did you make this machine yourself?" asked the stranger of Tom, as the
young inventor worked at the damaged part of his craft.

Mr. Damon had also alighted, taken off his goggles, and was looking
aloft, where the army aircraft were going through various evolutions,
and down below, where the young soldiers were drilling under such
conditions, as far as possible, as they might meet with when some of
their number went "over the top." Mr. Damon was murmuring to himself
such remarks as:

"Bless my fountain pen! look at that chap turning upside down! Bless my
inkwell!"

"I beg your pardon," remarked Tom Swift, following the remark of the
man, whose face he was trying to recall. It was not that Tom had not
heard the question, but he was trying to gain time before answering.

"I asked if you made this machine yourself," went on the man, as he
peered about at the Hawk. "It isn't like any I've ever seen before, and
I know something about airships. It has some new wrinkles on it, and I
thought you might have evolved them yourself. Not that it's an amateur
affair, by any means!" he added hastily, as if fearing the young
inventor might resent the implication that his machine was a home-made
product.

"Yes, I originated this," answered Tom, as he put a new turn-buckle in
place; "but I didn't actually construct it--that is, except for some
small parts. It was made in the shop--"

"Over at the army construction plant, I presume," interrupted the man
quickly, as he motioned toward the big factory, not far from Shopton,
where aircraft for Uncle Sam's Army were being turned out by the
hundreds.

"Might as well let him think that," mused Tom; "at least until I can
figure out who he is and what he wants."

"This is different from most of those up there," and the stranger
pointed toward the circling craft on high. "A bit more speedy, I guess,
isn't it?"

"Well, yes, in a way," agreed Tom, who was bending over his craft. He
stole a side look at the man. The face was becoming more and more
familiar, yet something about it puzzled Tom Swift.

"I've seen him before, and yet he didn't look like that," thought the
young inventor. "It's different, somehow. Now why should my memory play
me a trick like this? Who in the world can he be?"

Tom straightened up, and tossed a monkey wrench into the tool box.

"Get everything fixed?" asked the stranger.

"I think so," and the young inventor tried to make his answer pleasant.
"It was only a small break, easily fixed."

"Then you'll be on your way again?"

"Yes. Are you ready?" called Tom to Mr. Damon.

"Bless my timetable, yes! I didn't think you'd start back again so
soon. There's one young fellow up there who has looped the loop three
times, and I expect him to fall any minute."

"Oh, I guess he knows his business," Tom said easily.  "We'll be
getting back now."

"One moment!" called the man. "I beg your pardon for troubling you, but
you seem to be a mechanic, and that's just the sort of man I'm looking
for. Are you open to an offer to do some inventive and constructive
work?"

Tom was on his guard instantly.

"Well, I can't say that I am," he answered. "I am pretty busy--"

"This would pay well," went on the man eagerly. "I am a stranger around
here, but I can furnish satisfactory references. I am in need of a good
mechanic, an inventor as well, who can do what you seem to have done so
well. I had hopes of getting some one at the army plant."

"I guess they're not letting any of their men go," said Tom, as Mr.
Damon climbed to his seat in the Hawk.

"No, I soon found that out. But I thought perhaps you--"

Tom shook his head.

"I'm sorry," he answered, "but I'm otherwise engaged, and very busy."

"One moment!" called the man, as he saw Tom about to start "Is the
Swift Company plant far from here?"

Tom felt something like a thrill go through him. There was an
unexpected note in the man's voice. The face of the young inventor
lightened, and the doubts melted away.

"No, it isn't far," Tom answered, shouting to be heard above the
crackling bangs of the motor. And then, as the craft soared into the
air, he cried exultingly:

"I have it! I know who he is! The scoundrel! His beard fooled me, and
he probably didn't know me with these goggles on. But now I know him!"

"Bless my calendar!" cried Mr. Damon. "What are you talking about?"

But Tom did not answer, for the reason that just then the Hawk fell
into an "air pocket," and needed all his attention to straighten her
out and get her on a level course again.

And while Tom Swift is thus engaged in speeding his aircraft along the
upper regions toward his home, it will take but a few moments to
acquaint my new readers with something of the history of the young
inventor. Those who have read the previous books in this series need be
told nothing about our hero.

Tom Swift was an inventor of note, as was his father. Mr. Swift was now
quite aged and not in robust health, but he was active at times and
often aided Tom when some knotty point came up.

Tom and his father lived on the outskirts of the town of Shopton, and
near their home were various buildings in which the different machines
and appliances were made. Tom's mother was dead, but Mrs. Baggert, the
housekeeper, was as careful in looking after Tom and his father as any
woman could be.

In addition to these three, the household consisted of Eradicate
Sampson, an aged colored servant, and, it might almost be added, his
mule Boomerang; but Boomerang had manners that, at times, did not make
him a welcome addition to any household. Then there was the giant Koku,
one of two big men Tom had brought back with him from the land where
the young inventor had been held captive for a time.

The first book of this series is called "Tom Swift and His Motor
Cycle," and it was in acquiring possession of that machine that Tom met
his friend Mr. Wakefield Damon, who lived in a neighboring town. Mr.
Damon owned the motor cycle originally, but when it attempted to climb
a tree with him he sold it to Tom.

Tom had many adventures on the machine, and it started him on his
inventive career. From then on he had had a series of surprising
adventures. He had traveled in his motor boat, in an airship, and then
had taken to a submarine. In his electric runabout he showed what the
speediest car on the road could do, and when he sent his wireless
message, the details of which can be found set down in the volume of
that name, Tom saved the castaways of Earthquake Island.

Tom Swift had many other thrilling escapes, one from among the diamond
makers, and another from the caves of ice; and he made the quickest
flight on record in his sky racer.

Tom's wizard camera, his great searchlight, his giant cannon, his photo
telephone, his aerial warship and the big tunnel he helped to dig,
brought him credit, fame, and not a little money. He had not long been
back from an expedition to Honduras, dubbed "the land of wonders," when
he was again busy on some of his many ideas. And it was to get some
relief from his thoughts that he had taken the flight with Mr. Damon on
the day the present story opens.

"What are you so excited about, Tom?" asked his friend, as the Hawk
alighted near the shed Back of the young inventor's home. "Bless my
scarf pin! but any one would think you'd just discovered the true
method of squaring the circle."

"Well, it's almost as good as that, and more practical," Tom said, with
a smile, as he motioned to Koku to put away the aircraft "I know who
that man is, now."

"What man, Tom?"

"The one who was questioning me when I was fixing the airship. I kept
puzzling and puzzling as to his identity, and, all at once, it came to
me. Do you know who he is, Mr. Damon?"

"No, I can't say that I do, Tom. But, as you say, there was something
vaguely familiar about him. It seemed as if I must have seen him
before, and yet--"

"That's just the way it struck me. What would you say if I told you
that man was Blakeson, of Blakeson and Grinder, the rival tunnel
contractors who made such trouble for us?"

"You mean down in Peru, Tom?"

"Yes."

Mr. Damon started in surprise, and then exclaimed:

"Bless my ear mufflers, Tom, but you're right! That was Blakeson! I
didn't know him with his beard, but that was Blakeson, all right! Bless
my foot-warmer! What do you suppose he is doing around here?"

"I don't know, Mr. Damon, but I'd give a good deal to know. It isn't
any good, I'll wager on that. He didn't seem to know me or you,
either--unless he did and didn't let on.  I suppose it was because of
my goggles--and you were gazing up in the air most of the time. I don't
think he knew either of us."

"It didn't seem so, Tom. But what is he doing here? Do you think he is
working at the army camp, or helping make Liberty Motors for the
aircraft that are going to beat the Germans?"

"Hardly. He didn't seem to be connected with the camp. He wanted a
mechanic, and hinted that I might do. Jove! if he really didn't know
who I was, and finds out, say! won't he be surprised?"

"Rather," agreed Mr Damon. "Well, Tom, I had a nice little ride. And
now I must be getting back. But if you contemplate a trip anywhere,
don't forget to let me know."

"I don't count on going anywhere soon," Tom answered. "I have something
on hand that will occupy all my time, though I don't just like it.
However, I'm going to do my best," and he waved good-bye to Mr. Damon,
who went off blessing various parts of his anatomy or clothing, an odd
habit he had.

As Tom turned to go into the house, the unsettled look still on his
face, some one hailed him.

"I say, Tom. Hello! Wait a minute! I've got something to show you!"

"Oh, hello, Ned Newton!" Called back the young inventor.  "Well, if
it's Liberty Bonds, you don't need to show me any, for dad and I will
buy all we can without seeing them."

"I know that, Tom, and it was a dandy subscription you gave me. I
didn't come about that, though I may be around the next time Uncle Sam
wants the people to dig down in their socks. This is something
different," and Ned Newton, a young banker of Shopton and a lifelong
friend of Tom's, drew a paper from his pocket as he advanced across the
lawn.

"There, Tom Swift!" he cried, flipping out an illustrated page,
evidently from some illustrated newspaper. "There's the very latest
from the other side. A London banker friend of mine sent it to me, and
it got past the censor all right.  It's the first authentic photograph
of the newest and biggest British tank. Isn't that a wonder?"

Ned held up the paper which had in it a fullpage photograph of a
monster tank--those weird machines traveling on endless steel belts of
caterpillar construction, armored, riveted and plated, with machine
guns bristling here and there.

"Isn't that great, Tom? Can you beat it? It's the most wonderful
machine of the age, even counting some of yours.  Can you beat it?"

Tom took the paper indifferently, and his manner surprised his chum.

"Well, what's the matter, Tom?" asked Ned. "Don't you think that great?
Why don't you say something? You don't mean to say you've seen that
picture before?"

"No, Ned."

"Then what's the matter with you? Isn't that wonderful?"




Chapter III

Ned is Worried


Tom Swift did not answer for several seconds. He stood holding the
paper Ned had given him, the sun slanting on the picture of the big
British tank. But the young inventor did not appear to see it. Instead,
his eyes were as though contemplating something afar off.

"Well, this gets me!" cried Ned, his voice showing impatience. "Here I
go and get a picture of the latest machine the British armies are
smashing up the Boches with, and bring it to you fresh from the mail--I
even quit my Liberty Bond business to do it, and I know some dandy
prospects, too--and here you look at it like a--like a fish!" burst out
Ned.

"Say, old man, I guess that's right!" admitted Tom. "I wasn't thinking
about it, to tell you the truth."

"Why not?" Ned demanded. "Isn't it great, Tom? Did you ever see
anything like it?"

"Yes."

"You did?" Cried Ned, in surprise. "Where? Say, Tom Swift, are you
keeping something from me?"

"I mean no, Ned. I never have seen a British tank."

"Well, did you ever see a picture like this before?" Ned persisted.

"No, not exactly like that But--"

"Well, what do you think of it?" cried the young banker, who was giving
much of his time to selling bonds for the Government. "Isn't it great?"

Tom considered a moment before replying. Then he said slowly:

"Well, yes, Ned, it is a pretty good machine. But--"

"'But!' Howling tomcats! Say, what's the 'matter with you, anyhow, Tom?
This is great! 'But!' 'But me no buts!' This is, without exception, the
greatest thing out since an airship. It will win the war for us and the
Allies, too, and don't you forget it! Fritz's barbed wire and dugouts
and machine gun emplacements can't stand for a minute against these
tanks! Why, Tom, they can crawl on their back as well as any other way,
and they don't mind a shower of shrapnel or a burst of machine gun
lead, any more than an alligator minds a swarm of gnats. The only thing
that makes 'em hesitate a bit is a Jack Johnson or a Bertha shell, and
it's got to be a pretty big one, and in the right place, to do much
damage. These tanks are great, and there's nothing like 'em."

"Oh, yes there is, Ned!"

"There is!" cried Ned. "What do you mean?"

"I mean there may be something like them--soon."

"There may? Say, Tom--"

"Now don't ask me a lot of questions, Ned, for I can't answer them.
When I say there may be something like them, I mean it isn't beyond the
realms of possibility that some one--perhaps the Germans--may turn out
even bigger and better tanks."

"Oh!" And Ned's voice showed his disappointment. "I thought maybe you
were in on that game yourself, Tom. Say, couldn't you get up something
almost as good as this?" and he indicated the picture in the paper.
"Isn't that wonderful?"

"Oh, well, it's good, Ned, but there are others. Yes, Dad, I'm coming,"
he called, as he saw his father beckoning to him from a distant
building.

"Well, I've got to get along," said Ned. "But I certainly am
disappointed, Tom. I thought you'd go into a fit over this
picture--it's one of the first allowed to get out of England, my London
friend said. And instead of enthusing you're as cold as a clam;" and
Ned shook his head in puzzled and disappointed fashion as he walked
slowly along beside the young inventor.

They passed a new building, one of the largest in the group of the many
comprising the Swift plant. Ned looked at the door which bore a notice
to the effect that no one was admitted unless bearing a special permit,
or accompanied by Mr. Swift or Tom.

"What's this, Tom?" asked Ned. "Some new wrinkle?"

"Yes, an invention I'm working on. It isn't in shape yet to be seen."

"It must be something big, Tom," observed Ned, as he viewed the large
building.

"It is."

"And say, what a whopping big fence you've got around the back yard!"
went on the young banker. "Looks like a baseball field, but it would
take some scrambling on the part of a back-lots kid to get over it."

"That's what it's for--to keep people out."

"I see! Well, I've got to get along. I'm a bit back in my day's quota
of selling Liberty Bonds, and I've got to hustle. I'm sorry I bothered
you about that tank picture, Tom."

"Oh, it wasn't a bother--don't think that for a minute, Ned! I was glad
to see it."

"Well, he didn't seem so, and his manner was certainly queer," mused
Ned, as he walked away, and turned in time to see Tom enter the new
building, which had such a high fence all around it. "I never saw him
more indifferent. I wonder if Tom isn't interested in seeing Uncle Sam
help win this war?  That's the way it struck me. I thought surely Tom
would go up in the air, and say this was a dandy," and Ned unfolded the
paper and took another look at the British tank photograph. "If there's
anything can beat that I'd like to see it," he mused.

"But I suppose Tom has discovered some new kind of air stabilizer, or a
different kind of carburetor that will vaporize kerosene as well as
gasolene. If he has, why doesn't he offer it to Uncle Sam? I wonder if
Tom is pro-German?  No, of Course he can't be!" and Ned laughed at his
own idea.

"At the same time, it is queer," he mused on. "There is something wrong
with Tom Swift."

Once more Ned looked at the picture. It was a representation of one of
the newest and largest of the British tanks. In appearance these are
not unlike great tanks, though they are neither round nor square, being
shaped, in fact, like two wedges with the broad ends put together, and
the sharper ends sticking out, though there is no sharpness to a tank,
the "noses" both being blunt.

Around each outer edge runs an endless belt of steel plates, hinged
together, with ridges at the joints, and these broad belts of steel
plates, like the platforms of some moving stairways used in department
stores, moving around, give motion to the tank.

Inside, well protected from the fire of enemy guns by steel plates, are
the engines for driving the belts, or caterpillar wheels, as they are
called. There is also the steering apparatus, and the guns that fire on
the enemy.  There are cramped living and sleeping quarters for the
tank's crew, more limited than those of a submarine.

The tank is ponderous, the smallest of them, which were those first
constructed, weighing forty-two tons, or about as much as a good-sized
railroad freight car. And it is this ponderosity, with its slow but
resistless movement, that gives the tank its power.

The tank, by means of the endless belts of steel plates, can travel
over the roughest country. It can butt into a tree, a stone wall, or a
house, knock over the obstruction, mount it, crawl over it, and slide
down into a hole on the other side and crawl out again, on the level,
or at an angle. Even if overturned, the tanks can sometimes right
themselves and keep on. At the rear are trailer wheels, partly used in
steering and partly for reaching over gaps or getting out of holes. The
tanks can turn in their own length, by moving one belt in one direction
and the other oppositely.

Inside there is nothing much but machinery of the gasolene type, and
the machine guns. The tank is closed except for small openings out of
which the guns project, and slots through which the men inside look out
to guide themselves or direct their fire.

Such, in brief, is a British tank, one of the most powerful and
effective weapons yet loosed against the Germans. They are useful in
tearing down the barbed-wire entanglements on the Boche side of No
Man's Land, and they can clear the way up to and past the trenches,
which they can straddle and wriggle across like some giant worm.

"And to think that Tom Swift didn't enthuse over these!" murmured Ned.
"I wonder what's the matter with him!"




Chapter IV

Queer Doings


There was a subdued air of activity about the Swift plant.  Subdued,
owing to the fact that it was mostly confined to one building--the new,
large one, about which stretched a high and strong fence, made with
tongue-and-groove boards so that no prying eyes might find a crack,
even, through which to peer.

In and out of the other buildings the workmen went as they pleased,
though there were not many of them, for Tom and his father were
devoting most of their time and energies to what was taking place in
the big, new structure. But here there was an entirely different
procedure.

Workmen went in and out, to be sure, but each time they emerged they
were scrutinized carefully, and when they went in they had to exhibit
their passes to a man on guard at the single entrance; and the passes
were not scrutinized perfunctorily, either.

Near the building, about which there seemed to be an air of mystery,
one day, a week after the events narrated in the opening chapters,
strolled the giant Koku. Not far away, raking up a pile of refuse, was
Eradicate Sampson, the aged colored man of all work. Eradicate
approached nearer and nearer the entrance to the building, pursuing his
task of gathering up leaves, dirt and sticks with the teeth of his
rake. Then Koku, who had been lounging on a bench in the shade of a
tree, Called:

"No more, Eradicate!"

"No mo' whut?" asked the negro quickly.  "I didn't axt yo' fo' nuffin
yit!"

"No more come here!" said the giant, pointing to the building and
speaking English with an evident effort.  "Master say no one come too
close."

"Huh! He didn't go fo' t' mean me!" exclaimed Eradicate.  "I kin go
anywheres; I kin!"

"Not here!" and Koku interposed his giant frame between the old man and
the first step leading into the secret building. "You no come in here."

"Who say so?"

"Me--I say so! I on guard. I what you call special
policeman--detectiff--no let enemies in!"

"Huh! You's a hot deteckertiff, yo' is!" snorted Eradicate. "Anyhow,
dem orders don't mean me! I kin go anywhere, I kin!"

"Not here!" said Koku firmly. "Master Tom say let nobody come near but
workmen who have got writing-paper. You no got!"

"No, but I kin git one, an' I's gwine t' hab it soon! I'll see Massa
Tom, dat's whut I will. I guess yo' ain't de only deteckertiff on de
place. I kin go on guard, too!" and Eradicate, dropping his rake,
strolled away in his temper to seek the young inventor.

"Well, Rad, what is it?" asked Tom, as he met the colored man. The
young inventor was on his way to the mysterious shop. "What is
troubling you?"

"It's dat dar giant. He done says as how he's on guard--a
deteckertiff--an' I can't go nigh dat buildin' t' sweep up de refuse."

"Well, that's right, Rad. I'd prefer that you keep away.  I'm doing
some special work in there and it's--"

"Am it dangerous, Massa Tom? I ain't askeered! Anybody whut kin drive
mah mule Boomerang--"

"I know, Eradicate, but this isn't so dangerous. It's just secret, and
I don't want too many people about. You can go anywhere else except
there. Koku is on guard."

"Den can't I be, Massa Tom?" asked the colored man eagerly. "I kin
guard an' detect same as dat low-down, good-fo'-nuffin white trash
Koku!"

Tom hesitated.

"I suppose I could get you a sort of officer's badge," he mused, half
aloud.

"Dat's whut I want!" eagerly exclaimed Eradicate. "I ain't gwine hab
dat Koku--dat cocoanut--crowin' ober me! I kin guard an' detect as
good's anybody!"

And the upshot of it was that Eradicate was given a badge, and put on a
special post, far enough from Koku to keep the two from quarreling, and
where, even if he failed in keeping a proper lookout, the old servant
could do no harm by his oversight.

"It'll please him, and won't hurt us," said Tom to his father. "Koku
will keep out any prying persons."

"I suppose you are doing well to keep it a secret, Tom," said Mr.
Swift, "but it seems as if you might announce it soon."

"Perhaps we may, Dad, if all goes well. I've given her a partial
shop-tryout, and she works well. But there is still plenty to do. Did I
tell you about meeting Blakeson?"

"Yes, and I can't understand why he should be in this vicinity. Do you
think he has had any intimation of what you are doing?"

"It's hard to say, and yet I would not be surprised. When Uncle Sam
couldn't keep secret the fact of our first soldiers sailing for France.
How can I expect to keep this secret? But they won't get any details
until I'm ready, I'm sure of that."

"Koku is a good discourager," said Mr. Swift, with a chuckle. "You
couldn't have a better guard, Tom."

"No, and if I can keep him and Eradicate from trying to pull off rival
detective stunts, or 'deteckertiff,' as Rad calls it, I'll be all
right. Now let's have another go at that carburetor. There's our weak
point, for it's getting harder and harder all the while to get
high-grade gasolene, and we'll have to come to alcohol of low proof, or
kerosene, I'm thinking."

"I wouldn't be surprised, Tom. Well, perhaps we can get up a new style
of carburetor that will do the trick. Now look at this needle valve;
I've given it a new turn," and father and son went into technical
details connected with their latest invention.

These were busy days at the Swift plant. Men came and went--men with
queerly shaped parcels frequently--and they were admitted to the big
new building after first passing Eradicate and then Koku, and it would
be hard to say which guard was the more careful. Only, of course, Koku
had the final decision, and more than one person was turned back after
Eradicate had passed him, much to the disgust of the negro.

"Pooh! Dat giant don't know a workman when he sees 'im!" snorted
Eradicate. "He so lazy his own se'f dat he don't know a workman! Ef I
sees a spy, Massa Tom, or a crook, I's gwine git him, suah pop!"

"I hope you do, Rad. We can't afford to let this secret get out," said
the young inventor.

It was one evening, when taking a short cut to his home, that Mr.
Nestor, the father of Mary Nestor, in whom Tom was more than ordinarily
interested, passed not far from the big enclosure which was guarded, on
the factory side, day and night. Inside, though out of sight and hidden
by the high fence, were other guards.

As Mr. Nestor passed along the fence, rather vaguely wondering why it
was so high, tight and strong, he felt the ground trembling beneath his
feet. It rumbled and shook as though a distant train were passing, and
yet there was none due now, for Mr. Nestor had just left one, and
another would not arrive for an hour.

"That's queer," mused Mary's father. "If I didn't know to the contrary,
I'd say that sounded like heavy guns being fired from a distance, or
else blasting. It seems to come from the Swift place," he went on. "I
wonder what they're up to in there."

Suddenly the rumbling became more pronounced, and mingled with it, in
the dusk of the evening, were the shouts of men.

"Look out!" some one cried. "She's going for the fence!"

A second later there was a cracking and straining of boards, and the
fence near Mr. Nestor bulged out as though something big, powerful and
mighty were pressing it from the inner side.

But the fence held, or else the pressure was removed, for the bulge
went back into place, though some of the boards were splintered.

"Have to patch that up in the morning," called another voice, and Mr.
Nestor recognized it as that of Tom Swift.

"What queer doings are going on here?" mused Mary's father. "Have they
got a wild bull shut up in there, and is he trying to get out? Lucky
for me he didn't," and he hurried on, the rumbling noise become fainter
until it died away altogether.

That night, after his supper and while reading the paper and smoking a
cigar, Mr. Nestor spoke to his daughter.

"Mary, have you seen anything of Tom Swift lately?"

"Why, yes, Father. He was over for a little while the other night, but
he didn't stay long. Why do you ask?"

"Oh, nothing special. I just came past his place and I heard some queer
noises, that's all. He's up to some more of his tricks, I guess. Has be
enlisted yet?"

"No.

"Is he going to?"

"I don't know," and Mary seemed a bit put out by this simple question.
"What do you mean by his tricks?" she asked, and a close observer might
have thought she was anxious to get away from the subject of Tom's
enlistment.

"Oh, like that one when he sent you something in a box labeled
'dynamite,' and gave us all a scare. You can't tell what Tom Swift is
going to do next. He's up to something now, I'll wager, and I don't
believe any good will come of it."

"You didn't think so after he sent his wireless message, and saved us
from Earthquake Island," said Mary, smiling.

"Hum! Well, that was different," snapped Mr. Nestor. "This time I'm
sure he's up to some nonsense! The idea of crashing down a fence! Why
doesn't he enlist like the other chaps, or sell Liberty Bonds like Ned
Newton?" and Mr. Nestor looked sharply at his daughter. "Ned gave up a
big salary as the Swifts financial man--a place he had held for a
year--to go back to the bank for less, just so he could help the
Government in the financial end of this war. Is Tom doing as much for
his country?"

"I'm sure I don't know," answered Mary; and soon after, with averted
face, she left the room.

"Hum! Queer goings on," mused Mr. Nestor. "Tom Swift may be all right,
but he's got an unbalanced streak in him that will bear looking out
for, that's what I think!"

And having settled this matter, at least to his own satisfaction, Mr.
Nestor resumed his smoking and reading.

A little later the bell rang. There was a murmur of voices in the hall,
and Mr. Nestor, half listening, heard a voice he knew.

"There's Tom Swift now!" he exclaimed. "I'm going to find out why he
doesn't enlist!"




Chapter V

"Is He a Slacker?"


Mr. Nestor, whatever else he was, proved to be a prudent father. He did
not immediately go into the front room, whither Mary and Tom hastened,
their voices mingling in talk and laughter.

Mr. Nestor, after leaving the young folks alone for a while, with a
loud "Ahem!" and a rattling of his paper as he laid it aside, started
for the parlor.

"Good-evening, Mr. Nestor!" said Tom, rising to shake hands with the
father of his young and pretty hostess.

"Hello, Tom!" was the cordial greeting, in return. "What's going on up
at your place?" went on Mr. Nestor, as he took a chair.

"Oh, nothing very special," Tom answered. "We're turning out different
kinds of machines as usual, and dad and I are experimenting, also as
usual."

"I suppose so. But what nearly broke the fence to-night?"

Tom started, and looked quickly at his host.

"Were you there?" he asked quickly.

"Well, I happened to be passing--took a short cut home--and I heard
some queer goings on at your place. I was speaking to Mary about them,
and wondering--"

"Father, perhaps Tom doesn't want to talk about his inventions,"
interrupted Mary. "You know some of them are secret--"

"Oh, I wasn't exactly asking for information!" exclaimed Mr. Nestor
quickly. "I just happened to hear the fence crash, and I was wondering
if something was coming out at me. Didn't know but what that giant of
yours was on a rampage, Tom," and he laughed.

"No, it wasn't anything like that," and Tom's voice was more sober than
the occasion seemed to warrant. "It was one of our new machines, and it
didn't act just right. No great damage was done, though. How do you
find business, Mr. Nestor, since the war spirit has grown stronger?"
asked Tom, and it seemed to both Mary and her father that the young
inventor deliberately changed the subject.

"Well, it isn't all it might be," said the other. "It's hard to get
good help. A lot of our boys enlisted, and some were taken in the
draft. By the way, Tom, have they called on you yet?"

"No. Not yet."

"You didn't enlist?"

"Ned Newton tried to," broke in Mary, "but the quota for this locality
was filled, and they told him he'd better wait for the draft. He
wouldn't do that and tried again. Then the bank people heard about it
and had him exempted. They said he was too valuable to them, and he has
been doing remarkably well in selling Liberty Bonds!" and Mary's eyes
sparkled with her emotions.

"Yes, Ned is a crackerjack salesman!" agreed Tom, no less
enthusiastically. "He's sold more bonds, in proportion, for his bank,
than any other in this county. Dad and I both took some, and have
promised him more. I am glad now that we let him go, although we valued
his services highly. We hope to have him back later."

"He can put me down for more bonds too!" said Mr. Nestor.  "I'm going
to see Germany beaten if it takes every last dollar I have!"

"That's what I say!" Cried Mary. "I took out all my savings, except a
little I'm keeping to buy a wedding present for Jennie Morse. Did you
know she was going to get married, Tom?" she asked.

"I heard so."

"Well, all but what I want for a wedding present to her has gone into
Liberty Bonds. Isn't this a history-making time, Tom?"

"Indeed it is, Mary!"

"Everybody who has a part in it--whether he fights as a soldier or only
knits like the Red Cross girls--will be telling about it for years
after," went on the girl, and she looked at Tom eagerly.

"Yes," he agreed. "These are queer times. We don't know exactly where
we're at. A lot of our men have been called.  We tried to have some of
them exempted, and did manage it in a few cases."

"You did?" cried Mr. Nestor, as if in surprise. "You stopped men from
going to war!"

"Only so they could work on airship motors for the Government," Tom
quietly explained.

"Oh! Well, of course, that's part of the game," agreed Mary's father.
"A lot more of our boys are going off next week. Doesn't it make you
thrill, Tom, when you see them marching off, even if they haven't their
uniforms yet? Jove, if I wasn't too old, I'd go in a minute!"

"Father!" cried Mary.

"Yes, I would!" he declared. "The German government has got to be
beaten, and we've got to do our bit; everybody has--man, woman and
child!"

"Yes," agreed Tom, in a low voice, "that's very true. But every one, in
a sense, has to judge for himself what the 'bit' is. We can't all do
the same."

There was a little silence, and then Mary went over to the piano and
played. It was a rather welcome relief, under the circumstances, from
the conversation.

"Mary, what do you think of Tom?" asked Mr. Nestor, when the visitor
had gone.

"What do I think of him?" And she blushed.

"I mean about his not enlisting. Do you think he's a slacker?"

"A slacker? Why, Father!"

"Oh, I don't mean he's afraid. We've seen proof enough of his courage,
and all that. But I mean don't you think he wants stirring up a bit?"

"He is going to Washington to-morrow, Father. He told me so to-night.
And it may be--"

"Oh, well, then maybe it's all right," hastily said Mr. Nestor. "He may
be going to get a commission in the engineer corps. It isn't like Tom
Swift to hang back, and yet it does begin to look as though he cared
more for his queer inventions--machines that butt down fences than for
helping Uncle Sam. But I'll reserve judgment."

"You'd better, Father!" and Mary laughed--a little. Yet there was a
worried look on her face.

During the next few nights Mr. Nestor made it a habit to take the short
cut from the railroad station, coming past the big fence that enclosed
one particular building of the Swift plant.

"I wonder if there's a hole where I could look through," said Mr.
Nestor to himself. "Of course I don't believe in spying on what another
man is doing, and yet I'm too good a friend of Tom's to want to see him
make a fool of himself.  He ought to be in the army, or helping Uncle
Sam in some way. And yet if he spends all his time on some foolish
contraption, like a new kind of traction plow, what good is that? If I
could get a glimpse of it, I might drop a friendly hint in his ear."

But there were no cracks in the fence, or, if there were, it was too
dark to see them, and also too dark to behold anything on the other
side of the barrier. So Mr. Nestor, wondering much, kept on his way.

It was a day or so after this that Ned Newton paid a visit to the Swift
home. Mr. Swift was not in the house, being out in one of the various
buildings, Mrs. Baggert said.

"Where's Tom?" asked the bond salesman.

"Oh, he hasn't come back from Washington yet," answered the housekeeper.

"He is making a long stay."

"Yes, he went about a week ago on some business. But we expect him back
to-day."

"Well, then I'll see him. I called to ask if Mr. Swift didn't want to
take a few more bonds. We want to double our allotment for Shopton, and
beat out some of the other towns in this section. I'll go to see Mr.
Swift."

On his way to find Tom's father Ned passed the big building in front of
which Eradicate and Koku were on guard.  They nodded to Ned, who passed
them, wondering much as to what it was Tom was so secretive about.

"It's the first time I remember when he worked on an invention without
telling me something about it," mused Ned.  "Well, I suppose it will
all come out in good time. Anything new, Rad?"

"No, Massa Ned, nuffin much. I'm detectin' around heah; keepin'
Dutchmen spies away!"

"And Koku is helping you, I suppose?"

"Whut, him?  Dat big, good-fo'-nuffin white trash? No, sah! I's
detectin' by mahse'f, dat's whut I is!" and Eradicate strutted proudly
up and down on his allotted part of the beat, being careful not to
approach the building too closely, for that was Koku's ground.

Ned smiled, and passed on. He found Mr. Swift, secured his subscription
to more bonds, and was about to leave when he heard a call down the
road and saw Tom coming in his small racing car, which had been taken
to the depot by one of the workmen.

"Hello, old man!" cried Ned affectionately, as his chum alighted with a
jump. "Where have you been?"

"Down to Washington. Had a bit of a chat with the President and gave
him some of my views."

"About the war, I suppose?" laughed Ned.

"Yes."

"Did you get your commission?"

"Commission?" And there was a wondering look on Tom's face.

"Yes. Mary Nestor said she thought maybe you were going to Washington
to take an examination for the engineering corps or something like
that. Did you get made an officer?"

"No," answered Tom slowly. "I went to Washington to get exempted."

"Exempted?" Cried Ned, and his voice sounded strained.




Chapter VI

Seeing Things


For a moment Tom Swift looked at his chum. Then something of what was
passing in the mind of the young bond salesman must have been reflected
to Tom, for he said,

"Look here, old man; I know it may seem a bit strange to go to all that
trouble to get exempted from the draft, to which I am eligible, but,
believe me, there's a reason. I can't say anything now, but I'll tell
you as soon as I can--tell everybody, in fact. Just now it isn't in
shape to talk about."

"Oh, that's all right, Tom," and Ned tried to make his voice sound
natural. "I was just wondering, that's all. I wanted to go to the front
the worst way, but they wouldn't let me. I was sort of hoping you
could, and come back to tell me about it."

"I may yet, Ned."

"You may? Why, I thought--"

"Oh, I'm only exempted for a time. I've got certain things to do, and I
couldn't do 'em if I enlisted or was drafted.  So I've been excused for
a time. Now I've got a pile of work to do. What are you up to Ned? Same
old story?"

"Liberty Bonds--yes. Your father just took some more."

"And so will I, Ned. I can do that, anyhow, even if I don't enlist. Put
me down for another two thousand dollars' worth."

"Say, Tom, that's fine! That will make my share bigger than I counted
on. Shopton will beat the record."

"That's good. We ought to pull strong and hearty for our home town.
How's everything else?"

"Oh, so-so. I see Koku and Eradicate trying to outdo one another in
guarding that part of your plant," and Ned nodded toward the big new
building.

"Yes, I had to let Rad play detective. Not that he can do
anything--he's too old. But it keeps him and Koku from quarreling all
the while. I've got to be pretty careful about that shop. It's got a
secret in it that--Well, the less said about it the better."

"You're getting my curiosity aroused, Tom," remarked Ned.

"It'll have to go unsatisfied for a while. Wait a bit and I'll give you
a ride. I've got to go over to Sackett on business, and if you're going
that way I'll take you."

"What in?"

"The Hawk."

"That's me!" cried Ned. "I haven't been in an aircraft for some time."

"Tell Miles to run her out," requested Tom. "I've got to go in and say
hello to dad a minute, and then I'll be with you."

"Seems like something was in the wind, Tom--big doings?" hinted Ned.

"Yes, maybe there is. It all depends on how she turns out."

"You might be speaking of the Hawk or--Mary Nestor!" said Ned, with a
sidelong look at his chum.

"As it happens, it's neither one," said Tom, and then he hastened away,
to return shortly and guide his fleet little airship, the Hawk, on her
aerial journey.

From then on, at least for some time, neither Tom nor Ned mentioned the
matters they had been discussing--Tom's failure to enlist, his
exemption, and what was being built in the closely guarded shop.

Tom's business in Sackett did not take him long, and then he and Ned
went for a little ride in the air.

"It's like old times!" exclaimed Ned, his eyes shining, though Tom
could not see them for two reasons. One was that Ned was sitting behind
him, and the other was that Ned wore heavy goggles, as did the young
pilot. Also, they had to carry on their talk through the speaking tube
arrangement.

"Yes, it is a bit like old times," agreed Tom. "We've had some great
old experiences together, Ned, haven't we?"

"We surely have! I wonder if we'll have any more? When we were in the
submarine, and in your big airship. Say, that big one is the one I
always liked! I like big things."

"Do you?" asked Tom. "Well, maybe, when I get--"

But Tom did not finish, for the Hawk unexpectedly poked her nose into
an empty pocket in the air just then, and needed a firm hand on the
controls. Furthermore, Tom decided against making the confidence that
was on the tip of his tongue.

At last the aircraft was straightened out and the pilot guided her on
toward the army encampment.

"That's the place I'd like to be," called Ned through the tube as the
faint, sweet notes of a bugle floated up from the parade ground.

"Yes, it would be great," admitted Tom. "But there are other things to
do for Uncle Sam besides wearing khaki."

"Tom's up to some game," mused Ned. "I mustn't judge him too hastily,
or I might make a mistake. And Mary mustn't, either. I'll tell her so."

For Mary Nestor had spoken to Ned concerning Tom, and the curiously
secretive air about certain of his activities. And the girl, moreover,
had spoken rather coldly of her friend.  Ned did not like this. It was
not like Mary and Tom to be at odds.

Once more the Hawk came to the ground, this time near the airship sheds
adjoining the Swift works. Just as Tom and Ned alighted, one of the
workmen summoned the young inventor toward the shop, which was so
closely guarded by Koku and Eradicate on the outside.

"I'll have to leave you, Ned," remarked Tom, as he turned away from his
chum. "There's a conference on about a new invention."

"Oh, that's all right. Business is business, you know.  I've got some
bond calls to make myself. I'll see you later."

"Oh, by the way, Ned!" exclaimed Tom, turning back for a moment, "I met
an old friend the other day; or rather an old enemy."

"Hum! When you spoke first, I thought you might mean Professor
Swyington Bumper, that delightful scientist," remarked Ned. "But he
surely was no enemy."

"No; but I meant some one I met about the same time. I met Blakeson,
one of the rival contractors when I helped dig the big tunnel."

"Is that so? Where'd you meet him?"

"Right around here. It was certainly a surprise, and at first I
couldn't place him. Then the memory of his face came back to me," and
Tom related the incident which had taken place the day he and Mr. Damon
were out in the Hawk.

"What's he doing around here?" asked Ned.

"That's more than I can say," Tom answered.

"Up to no good, I'll wager!"

"I agree with you," came from Tom. "But I'm on the watch."

"That's wise, Tom. Well, I'll see you later."

During the week which followed this talk Ned was very busy on Liberty
Bond work, and, he made no doubt, his chum was engaged also. This
prevented them from meeting, but finally Ned, one evening, decided to
walk over to the Swift home.

"I'll pay Tom a bit of a call," he mused. "Maybe he'll feel more like
talking now. Some of the boys are asking why he doesn't enlist, and
maybe if I tell him that he'll make some explanation that will quiet
things down a bit. It's a shame that Tom should be talked about."

With this intention in view, Ned kept on toward his chum's house, and
he was about to turn in through a small grove of trees, which would
lead to a path across the fields, when the young bond salesman was
surprised to hear some one running toward him. He could see no one, for
the path wound in and out among the trees, but the noise was plain.

"Some one in a hurry," mused Ned.

A moment later he caught sight of a small lad named Harry Telford
running toward him. The boy had his hat in his hand, and was speeding
through the fast-gathering darkness as though some one were after him.

"What's the rush?" asked Ned. "Playing cops and robbers?" That was a
game Tom and Ned had enjoyed in their younger days.

"I--I'm runnin' away!" panted Harry. "I--I seen something!"

"You saw something?" repeated Ned. "What was it--a ghost?" and he
laughed, thinking the boy would do the same.

"No, it wasn't no ghost!" declared Harry, casting a look over his
shoulder. "It was a wild elephant that I saw, and it's down in a big
yard with a fence around it."

"Where's that?" asked Ned. "The circus hasn't come to town this
evening, has it?"

"No," answered Harry, "it wasn't no circus. I saw this elephant down in
the big yard back of one of Mr. Swift's factories."

"Oh, down there, was it!" exclaimed Ned. "What was it like?"

"Well, I was walking along the top of the hill," explained Harry, "and
there's one place where, if you climb a tree, you can look right down
in the big fenced-in yard. I guess I'm about the only one that knows
about it."

"I don't believe Tom does," mused Ned, "or he'd have had that tree cut
down. He doesn't want any spying, I take it.  Well, what'd you see?" he
asked Harry aloud.

"Saw an elephant, I tell you!", insisted the younger boy.  "I was in
the tree, looking down, for a lot of us kids has tried to peek through
the fence and couldn't I wanted to see what was there."

"And did you?" asked Ned.

"I sure did! And it scared me, too," admitted Harry. "All at once, when
I was lookin', I saw the big doors at the back of the shed open, and
the elephant waddled out."

"Are you sure you weren't 'seeing things,' like the little boy in the
story?" asked Ned.

"Well, I sure did see something!" insisted Harry. "It was a great big
gray thing, bigger'n any elephant I ever saw in any circus. It didn't
seem to have any tail or trunk, or even legs, but it went slow, just
like an elephant does, and it shook the ground, it stepped so hard!"

"Nonsense!" cried Ned.

"Sure I saw it!" cried Harry. "Anyhow," he added, after a moment's
thought, "it was as big as an elephant, though not like any I ever saw."

"What did it do?" asked Ned.

"Well, it moved around and then it started for the fence nearest me,
where I was up in the tree. I thought it might have seen me, even
though it was gettin' dark, and it might bust through; so I ran!"

"Hum! Well, you surely were seeing things," murmured Ned, but, while he
made light of what the boy told him, the young bank clerk was thinking:
"What is Tom up to now?"




Chapter VII

Up a Tree


"Want to come and have a look?" asked Harry, as Ned paused in the patch
of woods, which were in deeper darkness than the rest of the
countryside, for night was fast falling.

"Have a look at what?" asked Ned, who was thinking many thoughts just
then.

"At the elephant I saw back of the Swift factory. I wouldn't be skeered
if you came along."

"Well, I'm going over to see Tom Swift, anyhow," answered Ned, "so I'll
walk that way. You can come if you like. I don't care about spying on
other people's property--"

"I wasn't spyin'!" exclaimed Harry quickly. "I just happened to look.
And then I seen something."

"Well, come on," suggested Ned. "If there's anything there, we'll have
a peep at it."

His idea was not to try to see what Tom was evidently endeavoring to
conceal, but it was to observe whence Harry had made his observation,
and be in a position to tell Tom to guard against unexpected lookers-on
from that direction.

During the walk back along the course over which Harry had run so
rapidly a little while before, Ned and the boy talked of what the
latter had seen.

"Do you think it could be some new kind of elephant?" asked Harry. "You
know Tom Swift brought back a big giant from one of his trips, and
maybe he's got a bigger elephant than any one ever saw before."

"Nonsense!" laughed Ned. "In the first place, Tom hasn't been on any
trip, of late, except to Washington, and the only kind of elephants
there are white ones."

"Really?" asked Harry.

"No, that was a joke," explained Ned. "Anyhow, Tom hasn't any giant
elephants concealed up his sleeve, I'm sure of that."

"But what could this be?" asked Harry. "It moved just like some big
animal."

"Probably some piece of machinery Tom was having carted from one shop
to another," went on the young bank clerk.  "Most likely he had it
covered with a big piece of canvas to keep off the dew, and it was that
you saw."

"No, it wasn't!" insisted Harry, but he could not give any further
details of what he had seen so that Ned could recognize it. They kept
on until they reached the hill, at the bottom of which was the Swift
home and the grounds on which the various shops were erected.

"Here's the place where you can look down right into the yard with the
high fence around it," explained Harry, as he indicated the spot.

"I can't see anything."

"You have to climb up the tree," Harry went on. "Here, this is the one,
and he indicated a stunted and gnarled pine, the green branches of
which would effectually screen any one who once got in it a few feet
above the ground.

"Well, I may as well have a look," decided Ned. "It can't do Tom any
harm, and it may be of some service to him. Here goes!"

Up into the tree he scrambled, not without some difficulty, for the
branches were close together and stiff, and Ned tore his coat in the
effort. But he finally got a position where, to his surprise, he could
look down into the very enclosure from which Tom was so particular to
keep prying eyes.

"You can see right down in it!" Ned exclaimed.

"I told you so," returned Harry. "But do you see--it?"

Ned looked long and carefully. It was lighter, now that they were out
of the clump of woods, and he had the advantage of having the last glow
of the sunset at his back.  Even with that it was difficult to make out
objects on the surface of the enclosed field some hundred or more feet
below.

"Do you see anything?" asked Harry again.

"No, I can't say I do," Ned answered. "The place seems to be deserted."

"Well, there was something there," insisted Harry. "Maybe you aren't
lookin' at the right place."

"Have a look yourself, then," suggested Ned, as he got down, a task no
more to his liking than the climb upward had been.

Harry made easier work of it, being smaller and more used to climbing
trees, a luxury Ned had, perforce, denied himself since going to work
in the bank.

Harry peered about, and then, with a sigh that had in it somewhat of
disappointment, said:

"No; there's nothing there now. But I did see something."

"Are you sure?" asked Ned.

"Positive!" asserted the other.

"Well, whatever it was--some bit of machinery he was moving, I
fancy--Tom has taken it in now," remarked Ned.  "Better not say
anything about this, Harry. Tom mightn't like it known."

"No, I won't."

"And don't come here again to look. I know you like to see strange
things, but if you'll wait I'll ask Tom, as soon as it's ready, to let
you have a closer view of whatever it was you saw. Better keep away
from this tree."

"I will," promised the younger lad. "But I'd like to know what it
was--if it really was a giant elephant  Say! if a fellow had a troop of
them he could have a lot of fun with 'em, couldn't he?"

"How?" asked Ned, hardly conscious of what his companion was saying.

"Why, he could dress 'em up in coats of mail, like the old knights used
to wear, and turn 'em loose against the Germans. Think of a regiment of
elephants, wearin' armor plates like a battleship, carryin' on their
backs a lot of soldiers with machine guns and chargin' against Fritz!
Cracky, that would be a sight!"

"I should say so!" agreed Ned, with a laugh. "There's nothing the
matter with your imagination, Harry, my boy!"

"And maybe that's what Tom's doin'!"

"What do you mean?"

"I mean maybe he is trainin' elephants to fight in the war. You know he
made an aerial warship, so why couldn't he have a lot of armor plated
elephants?"

"Oh, I suppose he could if he wanted to," admitted Ned.  "But I guess
he isn't doing that. Don't get to going too fast in high speed, Harry,
or you may have nightmare. Well, I'm going down to see Tom."

"And you won't tell him I was peekin'?"

"Not if you don't do it again. I'll advise him to have that tree cut
down, though. It's too good a vantage spot."

Harry turned and went in the direction of his home, while Ned kept on
down the hill toward the house of his chum. The young bond salesman was
thinking of many things as he tramped, along, and among them was the
information Harry had just given.

But Ned did not pay a visit to his chum that evening. When he reached
the house he found that Tom had gone out, leaving no word as to when he
would be back.

"Oh, well, I can tell him to-morrow," thought Ned.

It was not, however, until two days later that Ned found the time to
visit Tom again. On this occasion, as before, he took the road through
the clump of woods where he had seen Harry running.

"And while I'm about it," mused Ned, "I may as well go on to the place
where the tree stands and make sure, by daylight, what I only partially
surmised in the evening--that Tom's place can be looked down on from
that vantage point."

Sauntering slowly along, for he was in no special hurry, having the
remainder of the day to himself, Ned approached the hill where the tree
stood from which Harry had said he had seen what he took to be a giant
elephant, perhaps in armor.

"It's a good clear day," observed Ned, "and fine for seeing. I wonder
if I'll be able to see anything."

It was necessary first to ascend the hill to a point where it overhung,
in a measure, the Swift property, though the holdings of Tom and his
father were some distance beyond the eminence. The tree from which Ned
and Harry had made their observations was on a knob of the hill, the
stunted pine standing out from among others like it.

"Well, here goes for another torn coat," grimly observed Ned, as he
prepared to climb. "But I'll be more careful.  First, though, let's see
if I can see anything without getting up."

He paused a little way from the pine, and peered down the hill. Nothing
could be seen of the big enclosed field back of the building about
which Tom was so careful.

"You have to be up to see anything," mused Ned. "It's up a tree for me!
Well, here goes!"

As Ned started to work his way up among the thick, green branches, he
became aware, suddenly and somewhat to his surprise, that he was not
the only person who knew about the observation spot. For Ned saw, a
yard above his head, as he started to climb, two feet, encased in
well-made boots, standing on a limb near the trunk of the tree.

"Oh, ho!" mused Ned. "Some one here before me! Where there are feet
there must be legs, and where there are legs, most likely a body. And
it isn't Harry, either! The feet are too big for that. I wonder--"

But Ned's musings were suddenly cut short, for the person up the tree
ahead of him moved quickly and stepped on Ned's fingers, with no light
tread.

"Ouch!" exclaimed the young bank clerk involuntarily, and, letting go
his hold of the limb, he dropped to the ground, while there came a
startled exclamation from the screen of pine branches above him.




Chapter VIII

Detective Rad


"Who's there?" came the demand from the unseen person in the tree.

"I might ask you the same thing," was Ned's sharp retort, as he nursed
his skinned and bruised fingers. "What are you doing up there?"

There was no answer, but a sound among the branches indicated that the
person up the tree was coming down. In another moment a man leaped to
the ground lightly and stood beside Ned. The lad observed that the
stranger was clean shaven, except for a small moustache which curled up
at the ends slightly.

"For all the world like a small edition of the Kaiser's," Ned described
it afterward.

"What are you doing here?" demanded the man, and his voice had in it
the ring of authority. It was this very quality that made Ned bristle
up and "get on his ear," as he said later. The young clerk did not
object to being spoken to authoritatively by those who had the right,
but from a stranger it was different.

"I might ask you the same thing," retorted Ned. "I have as much right
here as you, I fancy, and I can climb trees, too, but I don't care to
have my fingers stepped on," and he looked at the scarified members of
his left hand.

"I beg your pardon. I'm sorry if I hurt you. I didn't mean to. And of
course this is a public place, in a way, and you have a right here. I
was just climbing the tree to--er--to get a fishing pole!"

Ned had all he could do to keep from laughing. The idea of getting a
fishing pole from a gnarled and stunted pine struck him as being
altogether novel and absurd. Yet it was not time to make fun of the
man. The latter looked too serious for that.

"Rather a good view to be had from up where you were, eh?" asked Ned
suggestively.

"A good view?" exclaimed the other. "I don't know what you mean!"

"Oh, then you didn't see anything," Ned went on. "Perhaps it's just as
well. Are you fond of fishing?"

"Very. I have--But I forget, I do not know you nor you me.  Allow me to
introduce myself. I am Mr. Walter Simpson, and I am here on a visit I
just happened to walk out this way, and, seeing a small stream, thought
I should like to fish. I usually carry lines and hooks, and all I
needed was the pole. I was looking for it when I heard you, and--"

"I felt you!" interrupted Ned, with a short laugh. He told his own
name, but that was all, and seemed about to pass on.

"Are there any locomotive shops around here?" asked Mr. Simpson.

"Locomotive shops?" queried Ned. "None that I know of.  Why?"

"Well, I heard heavy machinery being used down there;" and he waved his
hand toward Tom's shops, "and I thought--"

"Oh, you mean Shopton!" exclaimed Ned. "That's the Swift plant. No,
they don't make locomotives, though they could if they wanted to, for
they turn out airships, submarines, tunnel diggers, and I don't know
what."

"Do they make munitions there--for the Allies?" asked Mr. Simpson, and
there was an eager look on his face.

"No, I don't believe so," Ned answered; "though, in fact, I don't know
enough of the place to be in a position to give you any information
about it," he told the man, not deeming it wise to go into particulars.

Perhaps the man felt this, as he did not press for an answer.

The two stood looking at one another for some little time, and then the
man, with a bow that had in it something of insolence, as well as
politeness, turned and went down the path up which Ned had come.

The young bank clerk waited a little while, and then turned his
attention to the tree which seemed to have suddenly assumed an
importance altogether out of proportion to its size.

"Well, since I'm here I'll have a look up that tree," decided Ned.

Favoring his bruised hand, Ned essayed the ascent of the tree more
successfully this time. As he rose up among the branches he found he
could look down directly into the yard with the high fence about it. He
Could see only a portion, good as his vantage point was, and that
portion had in it a few workmen--nothing else.

"No elephants there," said Ned, with a smile, as he remembered Harry's
excitement. "Still it's just as well for Tom to know that his place can
be looked down on. I'll go and tell him."

As Ned descended the tree he caught a glimpse, off to one side among
some bushes, of something moving.

"I wonder if that's my Simp friend, playing I spy?" mused Ned. "Guess
I'd better have a look."

He worked his way carefully close to the spot where he had seen the
movement. Proceeding then with more caution, watching each step and
parting the bushes with a careful hand, Ned beheld what he expected.

There was the late occupant of the pine tree the man who had stepped on
Ned's fingers, applying a small telescope to his eye and gazing in the
direction of Tom Swift's home.

The man stood concealed in a screen of bushes with his back toward Ned,
and seemed oblivious to his surroundings.  He moved the glass to and
fro, and seemed eagerly intent on discovering something.

"Though what he can see of Tom's place from there isn't much," mused
Ned. "I've tried it myself, and I know; you have to be on an elevation
to look down.  Still it shows he's after something, all right. Guess
I'll throw a little scare into him."

As yet, Ned believed himself unobserved, and that his presence was not
suspected was proved a moment later when he shouted:

"Hey! What are you doing there?"

He had his eye on the partially concealed man, and the latter, as Ned
said afterward, jumped fully two feet in the air, dropping his
telescope as he did so, and turning to face the lad.

"Oh, it's you, is it?" he faltered.

"No one else;" and Ned grinned. "Looking for a good place to fish, I
presume?"

Then, at least for once, the man's suave manner dropped from him as if
it had been a mask. He bared his teeth in a snarl as he answered:

"Mind your own business!"

"Something I'd advise you also to do," replied Ned smoothly. "You can't
see anything from there," he went on.  "Better go back to the tree
and--cut a fishing pole!"

With this parting shot Ned sauntered down the hill, and swung around to
make his way toward Tom's home. He paid no further attention to the
man, save to determine, by listening, that the fellow was searching
among the bushes for the dropped telescope.

The young inventor was at home, taking a hasty lunch which Mrs. Baggert
had set out for him, the while he poured over some blueprint drawings
that, to Ned's unaccustomed eyes, looked like the mazes of some
intricate puzzle.

"Well, where have you been keeping yourself, old man?" asked Tom Swift,
after he had greeted his friend.

"I might ask the same of you," retorted Ned, with a smile.  "I've been
trying to find you to give you some important information, and I made
up my mind, after what happened to-day, to write it and leave it for
you if I didn't see you."

"What happened to-day?" asked Tom, and there was a serious look on his
face.

"You are being spied upon--at least, that part of your works enclosed
in the new fence is," replied Ned.

"You don't mean it!" Cried Tom. "This accounts for some of it, then."

"For some of what?" asked Ned.

"For some of the actions of that Blakeson. He's been hanging around
here, I understand, asking too many questions about things that I'm
trying to keep secret--even from my best friends," and as Tom said this
Ned fancied there was a note of regret in his voice.

"Yes, you are keeping some things secret, Tom," said Ned, determined
"to take the bull by the horns," as it were.

"I'm sorry, but it has to be," went on Tom. "In a little while--"

"Oh, don't think that I'm at all anxious to know things!" broke in Ned.
"I was thinking of some one else, Tom--another of your friends."

"Do you mean Mary?"

Ned nodded.

"She feels rather keenly your lack of explanations," went on the young
bank clerk. "If you could only give her a hint--"

"I'm sorry, but it can't be done," and Tom spoke firmly.  "But you
haven't told me all that happened. You say I am being spied upon."

"Yes," and Ned related what had taken place in the tree.

"Whew!" whistled Tom. "That's going some with a vengeance!  I must have
that tree down in a jiffy. I didn't imagine there was a spot where the
yard could be overlooked. But I evidently skipped that tree.
Fortunately it's on land owned by a concern with which I have some
connection, and I can have it chopped down without any trouble. Much
obliged to you, Ned. I shan't forget this in a hurry. I'll go right
away and--"

Tom's further remark was interrupted by the hurried entrance of
Eradicate Sampson. The old man was smiling in pleased anticipation,
evidently, at the same time, trying hard not to give way to too much
emotion.

"I's done it, Massa Tom!" he cried exultingly.

"Done what?" asked the young inventor. "I hope you and Koku haven't had
another row."

"No, sah! I don't want nuffin t' do wif dat ornery, low-down white
trash! But I's gone an' done whut I said I'd do!"

"What's that, Rad? Come on, tell us! Don't keep us in suspense."

"I's done some deteckertiff wuk, lest laik I said I'd do, an' I's
cotched him! By golly, Massa Tom! I's cotched him black-handed, as it
says!"

"Caught him? Whom have you caught, Rad?" cried Tom. "Do you suppose he
means he's caught the man you saw up the tree, Ned? The man you think
is a German spy?"

"It couldn't be. I left him only a little while ago hunting for his
telescope."

"Then whom have you caught, Rad?" cried Tom. "Come on, I'll give you
credit for it. Tell us!"

"I's cotched dat Dutch Sauerkrauter, dat's who I's cotched, Massa Tom!
By golly, I's cotched him!"

"But who, Rad? Who is he?"

"I don't know his name, Massa Tom, but he's a Sauerkrauter, all right.
Dat's whut he eats for lunch, an' dat's why I calls him dat. I's
cotched him, an' he's locked up in de stable wif mah mule Boomerang.
An' ef he tries t' git out Boomerang'll jest natchully kick him into
little pieces--dat's whut Boomerang will do, by golly!"




Chapter IX

A Night Test


"Come on, Ned," said Tom, after a moment or two of silent contemplation
of Eradicate. "I don't know what this cheerful camouflager of mine is
talking about, but we'll have to go to see, I suppose. You say you have
shut some one up in Boomerang's stable, Rad?"

"Yes, sah, Massa Tom, dat's whut I's gone an done."

"And you say he's a German?"

"I don't know as to dat, Massa Tom, but he suah done eat sauerkraut
'mostest ebery meal. Dat's whut I call him--a Sauerkrauter! An' he suah
was spyin'."

"How do you know that, Rad?"

"'Cause he done went from his own shop on annuder man's ticket into de
secret shop, dat's whut he went an' done!"

"Do you mean to tell me, Rad," went on Tom, "that one of the workmen
from another shop entered Number Thirteen on the pass issued in the
name of one of the men regularly employed in my new shop?"

"Dat's whut he done, Massa Tom."

"How do you know?"

"'Cause I detected him doin' it. Yo'-all done made me a deteckertiff,
an' I detected."

"Go on, Rad."

"Well, sah, Massa Tom, I seen dish yeah Dutchman git a ticket-pass
offen one ob de reg'lar men. Den he went in de unlucky place an' stayed
fo' a long time. When he come out I jest natchully nabbed him, dat's
whut I done, an' I took him to Boomerang's stable."

"How'd you get him to go with you?" asked Ned, for the old colored man
was feeble, and most of the men employed at Tom's plant were of a
robust type.

"I done fooled him. I said as how I'd jest brought from town in mah
mule cart some new sauerkraut, an' he could sample it if he liked. So
he went wif me, an' when I got him to de stable I pushed him in and
locked de door!"

"Come on!" cried Tom to his chum. "Rad may be right, after all, and one
of my workmen may be a German spy, though I've tried to weed them all
out.

"However, no matter about that, if he was employed in another shop, he
had no right to go into Number Thirteen.  That's a violation of rules.
But if he's in Rad's ramshackle stable he can easily get out."

"No, sah, dat's whut he can't do!" insisted the colored man.

"Why not?" asked Tom.

"'Cause Boomerang's on guard, an' yo'-all knows how dat mule of mine
can use his heels!"

"I know, Rad," went on Tom; "but this fellow will find a way of keeping
out of their way. We must hurry."

"Oh, he's safe enough," declared the colored man. "I done tole Koku to
stan' guard, too! Dat low-down white trash ob a giant is all right fo'
guardin', but he ain't wuff shucks at detectin'!" said Eradicate, with
pardonable pride. "By golly, maybe I's too old t' put on guard, but I
kin detect, all right!"

"If this proves true, I'll begin to believe you can," replied Tom. "Hop
along, Ned!"

Followed by the shuffling and chuckling negro, Tom and Ned went to the
rather insecure stable where the mule Boomerang was kept. That is, the
stable was insecure from the standpoint of a jail. But the sight of the
giant Koku marching up and down in front of the place, armed with a big
club, reassured Tom.

"Is he in there, Koku?" asked the young inventor.

"Yes, Master! He try once come out, but he approach his head very close
my defense weapon and he go back again."

"I should think he would," laughed Ned, as he noted the giant's club.

"Well, Rad, let's have a look at your prisoner. Open the door, Koku,"
commanded Tom.

"Better look out," advised Ned. "He may be armed."

"We'll have to take a chance. Besides, I don't believe he is, or he'd
have fired at Koku. There isn't much to fear with the giant ready for
emergencies. Now we'll see who he is. I can't imagine one of my men
turning traitor."

The door was opened and a rather miserable-looking man shuffled out.
There was a bloody rag on his head, and he seemed to have made more of
an effort to escape than Koku described, for he appeared to have
suffered in the ensuing fight.

"Carl Schwen!" exclaimed Tom. "So it was you, was it?"

The German, for such he was, did not answer for a moment. He appeared
downcast, and as if suffering. Then a change came over him. He
straightened up, saluted as a soldier might have done, and a sneering
look came into his face. It was succeeded by one of pride as the man
exclaimed:

"Yes, it is I! And I tried to do what I tried to do for the Fatherland!
I have failed. Now you will have me shot as a spy, I suppose!" he added
bitterly.

Tom did not answer directly. He looked keenly at the man, and at last
said:

"I am sorry to see this. I knew you were a German, Schwen, but I kept
you employed at work that could not, by any possibility, be considered
as used against your country. You are a good machinist, and I needed
you. But if what I hear about you is true, it is the end."

"It is the end," said the man simply. "I tried and failed.  If it had
not been for Eradicate--Well, he's smarter than I gave him credit for,
that's all!"

The man spoke very good English, with hardly a trace of German accent,
but there was no doubt as to his character.

"What will you do with him, Tom?" asked Ned.

"I don't know. I'll have to do a little investigating first. But he
must be locked up. Schwen," went on the young inventor, "I'm sorry
about this, but I shall have to give you into the custody of a United
States marshal. You are not a naturalized citizen, are you?"

The man muttered something in German to the effect that he was not
naturalized and was glad of it.

"Then you come under the head of an enemy alien," decided Tom, who
understood what was said, "and will have to be interned. I had hoped to
avoid this, but it seems it cannot be. I am sorry to lose you, but
there are more important matters. Now let's get at the bottom of this."

Schwen was, after a little delay, taken in charge by the proper
officer, and then a search was made of his room, for, in common with
some of the other workmen, he lived in a boarding house not far from
the plant.

There, by a perusal of his papers, enough was revealed to show Tom the
danger he had escaped.

"And yet I don't know that I have altogether escaped it," he said to
Ned, as they talked it over. "There's no telling how long this spy work
may have been going on. If he has discovered all the secrets of Shop
Thirteen it may be a bad thing for the Allies and--"

"Look out!" warned Ned, with a laugh. "You'll be saying things you
don't want to, Tom and not at all in keeping with your former silence."

"That's so," agreed the young inventor, with a sigh. "But if things go
right I'll not have to keep silent much longer.  I may be able to tell
you everything."

"Don't tell me--tell Mary," advised his chum. "She feels your silence
more than I do. I know how such things are."

"Well, I'll be able to tell her, too," decided Tom. "That is, if Schwen
hasn't spoiled everything. Look here, Ned, these papers show he's been
in correspondence with Blakeson and Grinder."

"What about, Tom?"

"I can't tell. The letters are evidently written in code, and I can't
translate it offhand. But I'll make another attempt at it. And here's
one from a person who signs himself Walter Simpson, but the writing is
in German."

"Walter Simpson!" cried Ned. "That's my friend of the tree!"

"It is?" cried Tom. "Then things begin to fit themselves together.
Simpson is a spy, and he was probably trying to communicate with
Schwen. But the latter didn't get the information he wanted, or, if he
did get it, he wasn't able to pass it on to the man in the tree.
Eradicate nipped him just in time."

And, so it seemed, the colored man had done. By accident he had
discovered that Schwen had prevailed on one of the workmen in Shop 13
to change passes with him. This enabled the German spy to gain
admittance to the secret place, which Tom thought was so well guarded.
The man who let Schwen take the pass was in the game, too, it appeared,
and he was also placed under arrest. But he was a mere tool in the pay
of the others, and had no chance to gain valuable information.

A hasty search of Shop 13 did not reveal anything missing, and it was
surmised (for Schwen would not talk) that he had not found time to go
about and get all that he was after.

Soon after Schwen's arrest the "Spy Tree," as Tom called it, was cut
down.

"Eradicate certainly did better than I ever expected he would,"
declared Tom. "Well, if all goes well, there won't be so much need for
secrecy after a day or so. We're going to give her a test, and then--"

"Give who a test?" asked Ned, with a smile.

"You'll soon see," answered Tom, with an answering grin.  "I hereby
invite you and Mr. Damon to come over to Shop Thirteen day after
to-morrow night and then--Well, you'll see what you'll see."

With this Ned had to be content, and he waited anxiously for the
appointed time to come.

"I surely will be glad when Tom is more like himself," he mused, as he
left his chum. "And I guess Mary will be, too.  I wonder if he's going
to ask her to the exhibition?"

It developed that Tom had done so, a fact which Ned learned on the
morning of the day set for the test.

"Come over about nine o'clock," Tom said to his chum. "I guess it will
be dark enough then."

Meanwhile Schwen and Otto Kuhn, the other man involved, had been locked
up, and all their papers given into the charge of the United States
authorities. A closer guard than ever was kept over No. 13 shop, and
some of the workmen, against whom there was a slight suspicion, were
transferred.

"Well, we'll see what we shall see," mused Ned on the appointed
evening, when a telephone message from Mr. Damon informed the young
bank clerk that the eccentric man was coming to call for him before
going on to the Swift place.




Chapter X

A Runaway Giant


"What do you think it's all about, Mr. Damon?"

"I'm sure I don't know, Ned."

The two were at the home of the young bank clerk, preparing to start
for the Swift place, it being nearly nine o'clock on the evening named
by the youthful inventor.

"Bless my hat-rack!" went on the eccentric man, "but Tom isn't at all
like himself of late. He's working on some invention, I know that, but
it's all I do know. He hasn't given me a hint of it."

"Nor me, nor any of his friends," added Ned. "And he acts so oddly
about enlisting--doesn't want even to speak of it.  How he got exempted
I don't know, but I do know one thing, and that is Tom Swift is for
Uncle Sam first, last and always!"

"Oh, of course!" agreed Mr. Damon. "Well, we'll soon know, I guess.
We'd better start, Ned."

"It's useless to try to guess what it is Tom is up to. He has kept his
secret well. The nearest any one has come to it was when Harry figured
out that Tom had a band of giant elephants which he was fitting with
coats of steel armor to go against the Germans," observed Ned, when he
and Mr. Damon were on their way.

"Well, that mightn't be so bad," agreed Mr. Damon.
"But--um--elephants--and wild giant ones, too!  Bless my circus ticket,
Ned! do you think we'd better go in that case?"

"Oh, Tom hasn't anything like that!" laughed Ned. "That was only
Harry's crazy notion after he saw something big and ungainly careening
about the enclosed yard of Shop Thirteen.  Hello, there go Mary Nestor
and her father!" and Ned pointed to the opposite side of the street
where the girl and Mr. Nestor could be seen in the light of a street
lamp.

"They're going out to see Tom's secret," said Mr. Damon.  "There's
plenty of room in my car. Let's ask them to go with us."

"Surely," agreed Ned, and a moment later he and Mary were in the rear
seat while Mr. Damon and Mr. Nestor were in the front, Mr. Damon at the
wheel, and they were soon speeding down the road.

"I do hope everything will go all right," observed Mary.

"What do you mean?" asked Ned.

"I mean Tom is a little bit anxious about this test."

"Did he tell you what it was to be?"

"No; but when he called to invite father and me to be present he seemed
worried. I guess it's a big thing, for he never has acted this way
before--not talking about his work."

"That's right," assented Ned. "But the secret will soon be disclosed, I
fancy. But how is it you aren't going to the dance with Lieutenant
Martin? He told me you had half accepted for to-night."

"I had." And if it had been light enough Ned would have seen Mary
blushing. "I was going with him. It's a dance for the benefit of the
Red Cross to get money for comfort kits for the soldiers. But when Tom
sent word that he'd like to have me present to-night, why--"

"Oh, I see!" broke in Ned, with a little laugh. "'Nough said!"

Mary's blushes were deeper, but the kindly night hid them.

Then they conversed on matters connected with the big war--the selling
of Liberty Bonds, the Red Cross work and the Surgical Dressings
Committee, in which Mary was the head of a junior league.

"Everybody in Shopton seems to be doing something to help win the war,"
said Mary, and as there was just then a lull in the talk between her
father and Mr. Damon her words sounded clearly.

"Yes, everybody--that is, all but a few," said Mr. Nestor, "and they
ought to get busy. There are some young fellows in this town that ought
to be wearing khaki, and I don't mean you, Ned Newton. You're doing
your bit, all right."

"And so is Tom Swift!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, as if there had been an
implied accusation against the young inventor.  "I heard, only to-day,
that one of his inventions--a gas helmet that he planned--is in use on
the Western front in Europe. Tom gave his patents to the government,
and even made a lot of the helmets free to show other factories how to
turn them out to advantage."

"He did?" cried Mr. Nestor.

"That's what he did.  Talk about doing your bit--"

"I didn't know that," observed Mary's father slowly. "Do you suppose
it's a test of another gas helmet that Tom has asked us out to see
to-night?"

"I hardly think so," said Ned. "He wouldn't wait until after dark for
that. This is something big, and Tom must intend to have it out in the
open. He probably waited until after sunset so the neighbors wouldn't
come out in flocks.  There's been a lot of talk about what is going on
in Shop Thirteen, especially since the arrest of the German spies, and
the least hint that a test is under way would bring out a big crowd."

"I suppose so," agreed Mr. Nestor. "Well, I'm glad to know that Tom is
doing something for Uncle Sam, even if it's only helping with gas
helmets. Those Germans are barbarians, if ever there were any, and
we've got to fight them the same way they fight us! That's the only way
to end the war!  Now if I had my way, I'd take every German I could lay
my hands on--"

"Father, pretzels!" exclaimed Mary.

"Eh? What's that, my dear?"

"I said pretzels!"

"Oh!" and Mr. Nestor's voice lost its sharpness.

"That's my way of quieting father down when he gets too strenuous in
his talk about the war," explained Mary. "We agreed that whenever he
got excited I was to say 'pretzels' to him, and that would make him
remember. We made up our little scheme after he got into an argument
with a man on the train and was carried past his station."

"That's right," admitted Mr. Nestor, with a laugh. "But that fellow was
the most obstinate, pig-headed Dutchman that ever tackled a plate of
pig's knuckles and sauerkraut, and if he had the least grain of common
sense he'd--"

"Pretzels!" cried Mary.

"Eh? Oh, yes, my dear. I was forgetting again."

There was a moment of merriment, and then, after the talk had run for a
while in other and safer channels, Mr. Damon made the announcement:

"I think we're about there. We'll be at Tom's place when we make the
turn and--"

He was interrupted by a low, heavy rumbling.

"What's that?" asked Mr. Nestor.

"It's getting louder--the noise," remarked Mary. "It sounds as if some
big body were approaching down the road--the tramp of many feet. Can it
be that troops are marching away?"

"Bless my spark plug!" suddenly cried Mr. Damon. "Look!"

They gazed ahead, and there, seen in the glare of the automobile
headlights, was an immense, dark body approaching them from across a
level field. The rumble and roar became more pronounced and the ground
shook as though from an earthquake.

A glaring light shone out from the ponderous moving body, and above the
roar and rattle a voice called:

"Out out of the way! We've lost control! Look out!"

"Bless my steering wheel!" gasped Mr. Damon, "that was Tom Swift's
voice! But what is he doing in that--thing?"

"It must be his new invention!" exclaimed Ned.

"What is it?" asked Mr. Nestor.

"A giant," ventured Ned. "It's a giant machine of some sort and--"

"And it's running away!" cried Mr. Damon, as he quickly steered his car
to one side--and not a moment too soon! An instant later in a cloud of
dust, and with a rumble and a roar as of a dozen express trains fused
into one, the runaway giant--of what nature they could only
guess--flashed and lumbered by, Tom Swift leaning from an opening in
the thick steel side, and shouting something to his friends.




Chapter XI

Tom's Tank


"What was it?" gasped Mary, and, to her surprise, she found herself
close to Ned, clutching his arm.

"I have an idea, but I'd rather let Tom tell you," he answered.

"But where's it going?" asked Mr. Nestor. "What in the world does Tom
Swift mean by inviting us out here to witness a test, and then nearly
running us down under a Juggernaut?"

"Oh, there must be some mistake, I'm sure," returned his daughter. "Tom
didn't intend this."

"But, bless my insurance policy, look at that thing go!  What in the
world is it?" cried Mr. Damon.

The "thing" was certainly going. It had careened from the road, tilted
itself down into a ditch and gone on across the fields, lights shooting
from it in eccentric fashion.

"Maybe we'd better take after it," suggested Mr. Nestor.  "If Tom is--"

"There, it's stopping!" cried Ned. "Come on!"

He sprang from the automobile, helped Mary to get out, and then the
two, followed by Mr. Damon and Mr. Nestor, made their way across the
fields toward the big object where it had come to a stop, the rumbling
and roaring ceasing.

Before the little party reached the strange machine--the "runaway
giant," as they dubbed it in their excitement--a bright light flashed
from it, a light that illuminated their path right up to the monster.
And in the glare of this light they saw Tom Swift stepping out through
a steel door in the side of the affair.

"Are you all right?" he called to his friends, as they approached.

"All right, as nearly as we can be when we've been almost scared to
death, Tom," said Mr. Nestor.

"I'm surely sorry for what happened," Tom answered, with a relieved
laugh. "Part of the steering gear broke and I had to guide it by
operating the two motors alternately. It can be worked that way, but it
takes a little practice to become expert."

"I should say so!" cried Mr. Damon. "But what in the world does it all
mean, Tom Swift? You invite us out to see something--"

"And there she is!" interrupted the young inventor. "You saw her a
little before I meant you to, and not under exactly the circumstances I
had planned. But there she is!" And he turned as though introducing the
metallic monster to his friends.

"What is she, Tom?" asked Ned. "Name it!"

"My latest invention, or rather the invention of my father and myself,"
answered Tom, and his voice showed the love and reverence he felt for
his parent. "Perhaps I should say adaptation instead of invention," Tom
went on, "since that is what it is. But, at any rate, it's my
latest--dad's and mine--and it's the newest, biggest, most improved and
powerful fighting tank that's been turned out of any shop, as far as I
can learn.

"Ladies--I mean lady and gentlemen--allow me to present to you War Tank
A, and may she rumble till the pride of the Boche is brought low and
humble!" cried Tom.

"Hurray! That's what I say!" cheered Ned.

"That's what I have been at work on lately. I'll give you a little
history of it, and then you may come inside and have a ride home."

"In that?" cried Mr. Damon.

"Yes. I can't promise to move as speedily as your car, but I can make
better time than the British tanks. They go about six miles an hour, I
understand, and I've got mine geared to ten. That's one improvement dad
and I have made."

"Ride in that!" cried Mr. Nestor. "Tom, I like you, and I'm glad to see
I've been mistaken about you. You have been doing your bit, after all;
but--"

"Oh, I've only begun!" laughed Tom Swift.

"Well, no matter about that. However much I like you," went on Mr.
Nestor, "I'd as soon ride on the wings of a thunderbolt as in Tank A,
Tom Swift."

"Oh, it isn't as bad as that!" laughed the young scientist. "But
neither is it a limousine. However, come inside, anyhow, and I'll tell
you something about it. Then I guess we can guide it back. The men are
repairing the break."

The visitors entered the great craft through the door by which Tom had
emerged. At first all they saw was a small compartment, with walls of
heavy steel, some shelves of the same and a seat which folded up
against the wall made of like powerful material.

"This is supposed to be the captain's room, where he stays when he
directs matters." Tom explained. "The machinery is below and beyond
here."

"How'd you come to evolve this?" asked Ned. "I haven't seen half enough
of the outside, to say nothing of the inside."

"You'll have time enough," Tom said. "This is my first completed tank.
There are some improvements to be made before we send it to the other
side to be copied.

"Then they'll make them in England as well as here, and from here we'll
ship them in sections."

"I don't see how you ever thought of it!" exclaimed the girl, in wonder.

"Well, I didn't all at once," Tom answered, with a laugh.  "It came by
degrees. I first got the idea when I heard of the British tanks.

"When I had read how they went into action and what they accomplished
against the barbed wire entanglements, and how they crossed the
trenches, I concluded that a bigger tank, one capable of more speed,
say ten or twelve miles an hour, and one that could cross bigger
excavations--the English tanks up to this time can cross a ditch of
twelve feet--I thought that, with one made on such specifications, more
effective work could be done against the Germans."

"And will yours do that?" asked Ned. "I mean will it do ten miles an
hour, and straddle over a wider ditch than twelve feet?"

"It'll do both," promptly answered Tom. "We did a little better than
eleven miles an hour a while ago when I yelled to you to get out of the
way just now. It's true we weren't under good control, but the speed
had nothing to do with that. And as for going over a big ditch, I think
we straddled one about fourteen feet across back there, and we can do
better when I get my grippers to working."

"Grippers!" exclaimed Mary.

"What kind of trench slang is that, Tom Swift?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Well, that's a new idea I'm going to try out It's something like
this," and while from a distant part of the interior of Tank A came the
sound of hammering, the young inventor rapidly drew a rough pencil
sketch.

It showed the tank in outline, much as appear the pictures of tanks
already in service--the former simile of two wedge-shaped pieces of
metal put together broad end to broad end, still holding good. From one
end of the tank, as Tom drew it, there extended two long arms of
latticed steel construction.

"The idea is," said Tom, "to lay these down in front of the tank, by
means of cams and levers operated from inside.  If we get to a ditch
which we can't climb down into and out again, or bridge with the belt
caterpillar wheels, we'll use the grippers. They'll be laid down,
taking a grip on the far side of the trench, and we'll slide across on
them."

"And leave them there?" asked Mr. Damon.

"No, we won't leave them. We'll pick them up after we have passed over
them and use them in front again as we need them. A couple of extra
pairs of grippers may be carried for emergencies, but I plan to use the
same ones over and over again."

"But what makes it go?" asked Mary. "I don't want all the details,
Tom," she said, with a smile, "but I'd like to know what makes your
tank move."

"I'll be able to show you in a little while," he answered.  "But it may
be enough now if I tell you that the main power consists of two big
gasolene engines, one on either side.  They can be geared to operate
together or separately. And these engines turn the endless belts made
of broad, steel plates, on which the tank travels. The belts pass along
the outer edges of the tank longitudinally, and go around cogged wheels
at either end of the blunt noses.

"When both belts travel at the same rate of speed the tank goes in a
straight line, though it can be steered from side to side by means of a
trailer wheel in the rear. Making one belt--one set of caterpillar
wheels, you know--go faster than the other will make the tank travel to
one side or the other, the turn being in the direction of the slowest
moving belt. In this way we can steer when the trailer wheels are
broken."

"And what does your tank do except travel along, not minding a hail of
bullets?" asked Mr. Nestor.

"Well," answered Tom, "it can do anything any other tank can do, and
then some more. It can demolish a good-sized house or heavy wall, break
down big trees, and chew up barbed-wire fences as if they were
toothpicks. I'll show you all that in due time. Just now, if the
repairs are finished, we can get back on the road--"

At that moment a door leading into the compartment where Tom and his
friends were talking opened, and one of the workmen said:

"A man outside asking to see you, Mr. Swift."

"Pardon me, but I won't keep you a moment," interrupted a suave voice.
"I happened to observe your tank, and I took the liberty of entering to
see--"

"Simpson!" cried Ned Newton, as he recognized the man who had been up
the tree. "It's that spy, Simpson, Tom!"




Chapter XII

Bridging a Gap


Such surprise showed both on the face of Ned Newton and that of the man
who called himself Walter Simpson that it would be hard to say which
was in the greater degree. For a moment the newcomer stood as if he had
received all electric shock, and was incapable of motion. Then, as the
echoes of Ned's voice died away and the young bank clerk, being the
first to recover from the shock, made a motion toward the unwelcome and
uninvited intruder, Simpson exclaimed.

"I will not bother now. Some other time will do as well."

Then, with a haste that could be called nothing less than precipitate,
he made a turn and fairly shot out of the door by which he had entered
the tank.

"There he goes!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my speedometer, but there he
goes!"

"I'll stop him!" cried Ned. "We've got to find out more about him! I'll
get him, Tom!"

Tom Swift was not one to let a friend rush alone into what might be
danger. He realized immediately what his chum meant when he called out
the identity of the intruder, and, wishing to clear up some of the
mystery of which he became aware when Schwen was arrested and the paper
showing a correspondence with this Simpson were found, Tom darted out
to try to assist in the capture.

"He went this way!" cried Ned, who was visible in the glare of the
searchlight that still played its powerful beams over the stern of the
tank, if such an ungainly machine can be said to have a bow and stern.
"Over this way!"

"I'm with you!" cried Tom. "See if you can pick up that man who just
ran out of here!" he cried to the operator of the searchlight in the
elevated observation section of what corresponded to the conning tower
of a submarine. This was a sort of lookout box on top of the tank,
containing, among other machines, the searchlight. "Pick him up!" cried
Tom.

The operator flashed the intense white beam, like a finger of light,
around in eccentric circles, but though this brought into vivid relief
the configuration of the field and road near which the tank was
stalled, it showed no running fugitive. Tom and Ned were
observed--shadows of black in the glare--by Mary and her friends in the
tank, but there was no one else.

"Come on!" cried Ned. "We can find him, Tom!"

But this was easier said than done. Even though they were aided by the
bright light, they caught no glimpse of the man who called himself
Simpson.

"Guess he got away," said Tom, when he and Ned had circled about and
investigated many clumps of bushes, trees, stumps and other barriers
that might conceal the fugitive.

"I guess so," agreed Ned. "Unless he's hiding in what we might call a
shell crater."

"Hardly that," and Tom smiled. "Though if all goes well the men who
operate this tank later may be searching for men in real shell holes."

"Is this one going to the other side?" asked Ned, as the two walked
back toward the tank.

"I hope it will be the first of my new machines on the Western front,"
Tom answered. "But I've still got to perfect it in some details and
then take it apart. After that, if it comes up to expectations, we'll
begin making them in quantities."

"Did you get him?" asked Mr. Damon eagerly, as the two young men came
back to join Mary and her friends.

"No, he got away," Tom answered.

"Did he try to blow up the tank?" asked Mr. Nestor, who had an abnormal
fear of explosives. "Was he a German spy?"

"I think he's that, all right," said Ned grimly. "As to his endeavoring
to blow up Tom's tank, I believe him capable of it, though he didn't
try it to-night--unless he's planted a time bomb somewhere about, Tom."

"Hardly, I guess," answered the young inventor. "He didn't have a
chance to do that. Anyhow we won't remain here long.  Now, Ned, what
about this chap? Is he really the one you saw up in the tree?"

"I not only saw him but I felt him," answered Ned, with a rueful look
at his fingers. "He stepped right on me. And when he came inside the
tank to-night I knew him at once. I guess he was as surprised to see me
as I was to see him."

"But what was his object?" asked Mr. Nestor.

"He must have some connection with my old enemy, Blakeson," answered
Tom, "and we know he's mixed up with Schwen. From the looks of him I
should say that this Simpson, as he calls himself, is the directing
head of the whole business. He looks to be the moneyed man, and the
brains of the plotters. Blakeson is smart, in a mechanical way, and
Schwen is one of the best machinists I've ever employed. But this
Simpson strikes me as being the slick one of the trio."

"But what made him come here, and what did he want?" asked Mary. "Dear
me! it's like one of those moving picture plots, only I never saw one
with a tank in it before--I mean a tank like yours, Tom."

"Yes, it is a bit like moving picture--especially chasing Simpson by
searchlight," agreed the young inventor. "As to what he wanted, I
suppose he came to spy out some of my secret inventions--dad's and
mine. He's probably been hiding and sneaking around the works ever
since we arrested Schwen.  Some of my men have reported seeing
strangers about, but I have kept Shop Thirteen well guarded.

"However, this fellow may have been waiting outside, and he may have
followed the tank when we started off a little while ago for the night
test. Then, when he saw our mishap and noticed that we were stalled, he
came in, boldly enough, thinking, I suppose, that, as I had never seen
him, he would take a chance on getting as much information as he could
in a hurry."

"But he didn't count on Ned's being here!" chuckled Mr. Damon.

"No; that's where he slipped a cog," remarked Mr. Nestor.  "Well, Tom,
I like your tank, what I've seen of her, but it's getting late and I
think Mary and I had better be getting back home."

"We'll be ready to start in a little while," Tom said, after a brief
consultation with one of his men. "Still, perhaps it would be just as
well if you didn't ride back with me. She may go all right, and then,
again, she may not.  And as it's dark, and we're in a rough part of the
field, you might be a bit shaken up. Not that the tank minds it!" the
young inventor hastened to add "She's got to do her bit over worse
places than this--much worse--but I want to get her in a little better
working shape first. So if you don't mind, Mary, I'll postpone your
initial trip."

"Oh, I don't mind, Tom! I'm so glad you've made this! I want to see the
war ended, and I think machines like this will help."

"I'll ride back with you, Tom, if you don't mind," put in Ned. "I guess
a little shaking up won't hurt me."

"All right--stick. We're going to start very soon."

"Well, I'm coming over to-morrow to have a look at it by daylight,"
said Mr. Damon, as he started toward his car.

"So am I," added Mary. "Please call for me, Mr. Damon."

"I will," he promised.

Mr. Nestor, his daughter, and Mr. Damon went back to the automobile,
while Ned remained with Tom. In a little while those in the car heard
once more the rumbling and roaring sound and felt the earth tremble.
Then, with a flashing of lights, the big, ungainly shape of the tank
lifted herself out of the little ditch in which she had come to a halt,
and began to climb back to the road.

Ned Newton stood beside Tom in the control tower of the great tank as
she started on her homeward way.

"Isn't it wonderful!" murmured Mary, as she saw Tank A lumbering along
toward the road. "Oh, and to think that human beings made that. To think
that Tom should know how to build such a wonderful machine!"

"And run it, too, Mary!  That's the point! Make it run!" cried her
father. "I tell you, that Tom Swift is a wonder!"

"Bless my dictionary, he sure is!" agreed Mr. Damon.

Along the road, back toward the shop whence it had emerged, rumbled the
tank. The noise brought to their doors inhabitants along the country
thoroughfare, and some of them were frightened when they saw Tom
Swift's latest war machine, the details of which they could only guess
at in the darkness.

"She'll butt over a house if it gets in her path, knock down trees,
chew up barbed-wire, and climb down into ravines and out again, and go
over a good-sized stream without a whimper," said Tom, as he steered
the great machine.

There was little chance then for Ned to see much of the inside
mechanism of the tank. He observed that Tom, standing in the forward
tower, steered it very easily by a small wheel or by a lever,
alternately, and that he communicated with the engine room by means of
electric signals.

"And she steers by electricity, too," Tom told his friend.  "That was
one difficulty with the first tanks. They had to be steered by brute
force, so to speak, and it was a terrific strain on the man in the
tower. Now I can guide this in two ways: by the electric mechanism
which swings the trailer wheels to either side, or by varying the speed
of the two motors that work the caterpillar belts. So if one breaks
down, I have the other."

"Got any guns aboard her--I mean machine guns?" asked Ned.

"Not yet.  But I'm going to install some. I wanted to get the tank in
proper working order first. The guns are only incidental, though of
course they're vitally necessary when she goes into action. I've got
'em all ready to put in. But first I'm going to try the grippers."

"Oh, you mean the gap-bridgers?" asked Ned.

"That's it," answered Tom. "Look out, we're going over a rough spot
now."

And they did. Ned was greatly shaken up, and fairly tossed from side to
side of the steering tower. For the tank contained no springs, except
such as were installed around the most delicate machinery, and it was
like riding in a dump cart over a very rough road.

"However, that's part of the game," Tom observed.

Tank A reached her "harbor" safely--in other words, the machine shop
enclosed by the high fence, inside of which she had been built.

Tom and Ned made some inquiries of Koku and Eradicate as to whether or
not there had been any unusual sights or sounds about the place. They
feared Simpson might have come to the shop to try to get possession of
important drawings or data.

But all had been quiet, Koku reported. Nor had Eradicate seen or heard
anything out of the ordinary.

"Then I guess we'll lock up and turn in," decided Tom.  "Come over
to-morrow, Ned."

"I will," promised the young bank clerk. "I want to see more of what
makes the wheels go round."  And he laughed at his own ingenuousness.

The next day Tom showed his friends as much as they cared to see about
the workings of the tank. They inspected the powerful gasolene engines,
saw how they worked the endless belts made of plates of jointed steel,
which, running over sprocket wheels, really gave the tank its power by
providing great tractive force.

Any self-propelled vehicle depends for its power, either to move itself
or to push or to pull, on its tractive force--that is, the grip it can
get on the ground.

In the case of a bicycle little tractive power is needed, and this is
provided by the rubber tires, which grip the ground. A locomotive
depends for its tractive power on its weight pressing on its driving
wheels, and the more driving wheels there are and the heavier the
locomotive, the more it can pull, though in that case speed is lost.
This is why freight locomotives are so heavy and have so many large
driving wheels. They pull the engine along, and the cars also, by their
weight pressing on the rails.

The endless steel belts of a tank are, the same as the wheels of a
locomotive. And the belts, being very broad, which gives them a large
surface with which to press on the ground, and the tank being very
heavy, great power to advance is thus obtained, though at the sacrifice
of speed.  However, Tom Swift had made his tank so that it would do
about ten miles and more an hour, nearly double the progress obtained
up to that time by the British machines.

His visitors saw the great motors, they inspected the compact but not
very attractive living quarters of the crew, for provision had to be
made for the men to stay in the tank if, perchance, it became stalled
in No Man's Land, surrounded by the enemy.

The tank was powerfully armored and would be armed. There were a number
of machine guns to be installed, quick-firers of various types, and in
addition the tank could carry a number of riflemen.

It was upon the crushing power of the tank, though, that most reliance
was placed. Thus it could lead the way for an infantry advance through
the enemy's lines, making nothing of barbed wire that would take an
artillery fire of several days to cut to pieces.

"And now, Ned," said Tom, about a week after the night test of the
tank, "I'm going to try what she'll do in bridging a gap."

"Have you got her in shape again?"

"Yes, everything is all right. I've taken out the weak part in the
steering gear that nearly caused us to run you down, and we're safe in
that respect now. And I've got the grippers made. It only remains to
see whether they're strong enough to bear the weight of my little
baby," and Tom affectionately patted the steel sides of Tank A.

While his men were getting the machine ready for a test out on the
road, and for a journey across a small stream not far away, Tom told
his chum about conceiving the idea for the tank and carrying it out
secretly with the aid of his father and certain workmen.

"That's the reason the government exempted me from enlisting," Tom
said. "They wanted me to finish this tank. I didn't exactly want to,
but I considered it my 'bit.' After this I'm going into the army, Ned."

"Glad to hear it, old man. Maybe by that time I'll have this Liberty
Bond work finished, and I'll go with you. We'll have great times
together! Have you heard anything more of Simpson, Blakeson and
Scoundrels?" And Ned laughed as he named this "firm."

"No," answered Tom. "I guess we scared off that slick German spy."

Once more the tank lumbered out along the road. It was a mighty engine
of war, and inside her rode Tom and Ned. Mary and her father had been
invited, but the girl could not quite get her courage to the point of
accepting, nor did Mr. Nestor care to go. Mr. Damon, however, as might
be guessed, was there.

"Bless my monkey wrench, Tom!" cried the eccentric man, as he noted
their advance over some rough ground, "are you really going to make
this machine cross Tinkle Creek on a bridge of steel you carry with
you?"

"I'm going to try, Mr. Damon."

A little later, after a successful test up and down a small gully, Tank
A arrived at the edge of Tinkle Creek, a small stream about twenty feet
wide, not far from Tom's home. At the point selected for the test the
banks were high and steep.

"If she bridges that gap she'll do anything," murmured Ned, as the tank
came to a stop on the edge.




Chapter XIII

Into a Trench


Tom cast a hasty glance over the mechanism of the machine before he
started to cross the stream by the additional aid of the grippers, or
spanners, as he sometimes called this latest device.

Along each side, in a row of sockets, were two long girders of steel,
latticed like the main supports of a bridge. They were of peculiar
triangular construction, designed to support heavy weights, and each
end was broadly flanged to prevent its sinking too deeply into the
earth on either side of a gully or a stream.

The grippers also had a sort of clawlike arrangement on either end,
working on the principle of an "orange-peel" shovel, and these claws
were designed to grip the earth to prevent slipping.

The spanners would be pulled out from their sockets on the side of the
tank by means of steel cables, which were operated from within. They
would be run out across the gap and fastened in place. The tank was
designed to travel along them to the other side of the gap, and, once
there, to pick up the girders, slip them back into place on the sides,
and the engine of war would travel on.

"You are mightily excited, Tom.

"I admit it, Ned. You see, I have not tried the grippers out except on
a small model. They worked there, but whether they will work in
practice remains to be seen. Of course, at this stage, I'm willing to
stake my all on the results, but there is always a half-question until
the final try-out under practical conditions."

"Well, we'll soon see," said one of the workmen. "Are you ready, Mr.
Swift?"

"All ready," answered Tom.

Tank A, as she was officially known, had come to a stop, as has been
said, on the very edge of Tinkle Creek. The banks were fairly solid
here, and descended precipitously to the water ten feet below. The
shores were about twenty feet apart.

"Suppose the spanners break when you're halfway over, Tom?" asked his
chum.

"I don't like to suppose anything of the sort. But if they do, we're
going down!"

"Can you get up again?"

"That remains to be seen," was the non-committal reply.  "Well, here
goes, anyhow!"

Going up into the observation tower, which was only slightly raised
above the roof of the highest part of the tank, Tom gave the signal for
the motors to start. There was a trembling throughout the whole of the
vast structure. Tom threw back a lever and Ned, peering from a side
observation slot, beheld a strange sight.

Like the main arm of some great steam shovel, two long, latticed
girders of steel shot out from the sides of the tank. They gave a half
turn, as they were pulled forward by the steel ropes, so that they lay
with their broader surfaces uppermost.

Straight across the stream they were pulled, their clawlike ends coming
to a rest on the opposite bank. Then they were tightened into place by
a backward pull on the operating cables, and Tom, with a sigh of
relief, announced:

"Well, so far so good!"

"Do we go over now?" inquired Ned.

"Over the top--yes, I hope," answered Tom, with a laugh.  "How about
you down there?" he called to the engine room through a telephone which
could only be used when the machinery was not in action, there being
too much noise to permit the use of any but visual signals after that.

"All right," came back the answer. "We're ready when you are."

"Then here we go!" said Tom. "Hold fast, Ned! Of course there's no real
telling what will happen, though I believe we'll come out of it alive."

"Cheerful prospect," murmured Ned.

The grippers were now in place. It only remained for the tank to propel
herself over them, pick them up on the other side of Tinkle Creek, and
proceed on her course.

Tom Swift hesitated a moment, one hand on the starting lever and the
other on the steering wheel. Then, with a glance at Ned, half whimsical
and half resolute, Tom started Tank A on what might prove to be her
last journey.

Slowly the ponderous caterpillar belts moved around on the sprocket
wheels. They ground with a clash of steel on the surface of the
spanners. So long was the tank that the forward end, or the "nose," was
halfway across the stream before the bottom part of the endless belts
gripped the latticed bridge.

"If we fall, we'll span the creek, not fall into it," murmured Ned, as
he looked from the observation slot.

"That's what I counted on," Tom said. "We'll get out, even if we do
fall."

But Tank A was not destined to fall. In another moment her entire
weight rested on the novel and transportable bridge Tom Swift had
evolved. Then, as the gripping ends of the girders sank farther into
the soil, the tank went on her way.

Slowly, at half speed, she crawled over the steel beams, making
progress over the creek and as safely above the water as though on a
regularly constructed bridge.

On and on she went. Now her entire weight was over the middle of the
temporary structures. If they were going to give way at all, it would
be at this point. But they did not give. The latticed and triangular
steel, than which there is no stronger form of construction, held up
the immense weight of Tank A, and on this novel bridge she propelled
herself across Tinkle Creek.

"Well, the worst is over," remarked Ned, as he saw the nose of the tank
project beyond the farthermost bank.

"Yes, even if they collapse now nothing much can happen," Tom answered.
"It won't be any worse than wallowing down into a trench and out again.
But I think the spanners will hold."

And hold they did! They held, giving way not a fraction of an inch,
until the tank was safely across, and then, after a little delay, due
to a jamming of one of the recovery cables, the spanners were picked
up, slid into the receiving sockets, and the great war engine was ready
to proceed again.

"Hurrah!" cried Ned. "She did it, Tom, old man!" and he clapped his
chum resoundingly on the back.

"She certainly did!" was the answer. "But you needn't knock me apart
telling me that. Go easy!"

"Bless my apple pie!" cried Mr. Damon, who was as much pleased as
either of the boys, "this is what I call great!"

"Yes, she did all that I could have hoped for," said Tom.  "Now for the
next test."

"Bless my collar button! is there another?"

"Just down into a trench and out again." Tom said. "This is
comparatively simple. It's only what she'll have to do every day in
Flanders."

The tank waddled on. A duck's sidewise walk is about the only kind of
motion that can be compared to it. The going was easier now, for it was
across a big field, and Tom told his friends that at the other end was
a deep, steep and rocky ravine in which he had decided to give the tank
another test.

"We'll imagine that ravine is a trench," he said, "and that we've got
to get on the other side of it. Of course, we won't be under fire, as
the tanks will be at the front, but aside from that the test will be
just as severe."

A little later Tank A brought her occupants to the edge of the "trench."

"Now, little girl," cried Tom exultingly, patting the rough steel side
of his tank, "show them what you can do!"

"Bless my plum pudding!" cried Mr. Damon, "are you really going down
there, Tom Swift?"

"I am," answered the young inventor. "It won't be dangerous. We'll
crawl down and crawl out. Hold fast!"

He steered the machine straight for the edge of the ravine, and as the
nose slipped over and the broad steel belts bit into the earth the tank
tilted downward at a sickening angle.

She appeared to be making the descent safely, when there was a sudden
change. The earth seemed to slip out from under the broad caterpillar
belts, and then the tank moved more rapidly.

"Tom, we're turning over!" shouted Ned. "We're capsizing!"




Chapter XIV

The Ruined Factory


Only too true were the words Ned Newton shouted to his chum. Tank A was
really capsizing. She had advanced to the edge of the gully and started
down it, moving slowly on the caterpillar bands of steel. Then had come
a sudden lurch, caused, as they learned afterward, by the slipping off
of a great quantity of shale from an underlying shelf of rock.

This made unstable footing for the tank. One side sank lower than the
other, and before Tom could neutralize this by speeding up one motor
and slowing down the other the tank slowly turned over on its side.

"But she isn't going to stop here!" cried Ned, as he found himself
thrown about like a pill in a box. "We're going all the way over!"

"Let her go over!" cried Tom, not that he could stop the tank now. "It
won't hurt her. She's built for just this sort of thing!"

And over Tank A did go. Over and over she rolled, sidewise, tumbling
and sliding down the shale sides of the great gully.

"Hold fast! Grab the rings!" cried Tom to his two companions in the
tower with him. "That's what they're for!"

Ned and Mr. Damon understood. In fact, the latter had already done as
Tom suggested. The young inventor had read that the British tanks
frequently turned turtle, and he had this in mind when he made
provision in his own for the safety of passengers and crew.

As soon as he felt the tank careening, Tom had pressed the signal
ordering the motors stopped, and now only the force of gravity was
operating. But that was sufficient to carry the big machine to the
bottom of the gulch, whither she slid with a great cloud of sand, shale
and dust.

"Bless my--bless my--" Mr. Damon was murmuring, but he was so flopped
about, tossed from one side to the other, and it took so much of his
attention and strength to hold on to the safety ring, that he could not
properly give vent; to one of his favorite expressions.

But there comes an end to all things, even to the descent of a tank,
and Tom's big machine soon stopped rolling, sliding, and turning
improvised somersaults, and rested in a pile of soft shale at the
bottom of the gully. And the tank was resting on her back!

"We've turned turtle!" cried Ned, as he noted that he was standing on
what, before, had been the ceiling of the observation tower. But as
everything was of steel, and as there was no movable furniture, no
great harm was done. In fact, one could as well walk on the ceiling of
the tank as on the floor.

"But how are you going to get her right side up?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Oh, turning upside down is only one of the stunts of the game. I can
right her," was the answer.

"How?" asked Ned.

"Well, she'll right herself if there's ground enough for the steel
belts to get a grip on.

"But can the motors work upside down?"

"They surely can!" responded Tom. "I made 'em that way on purpose. The
gasolene feeds by air pressure, and that works standing on its head, as
well as any other way. It's going to be a bit awkward for the men to
operate the controls, but we won't be this way long. Before I start to
right her, though, I want to make sure nothing is broken."

Tom signaled to the engine room, and, as the power was off and the
speaking tube could be used, he called through it:

"How are you down there?"

"Right-o!" came back the answer from a little Englishman Tom had hired
because he knew something about the British tanks. "'Twas a bit of
nastiness for a while, but it won't take us long to get up ag'in."

"That's good!" commented Tom. "I'll come down and have a look at you."

It was no easy matter, with the tank capsized, to get to the main
engine room, but Tom Swift managed it. To his delight, aside from a
small break in one of the minor machines, which would not interfere
with the operation or motive force of the monster war engine,
everything was in good shape. There was no leak from the gasolene
tanks, which was one of the contingencies Tom feared, and, as he had
said, the motors would work upside down as well as right side up, a
fact he had proved more than once in his Hawk.

"Well, we'll make a start," he told his chief engineer.  "Stand by when
I give the signal, and we'll try to crawl out of this right side up."

"How are you going to do it?" asked Ned, as his chum crawled back into
the observation tower.

"Well, I'm going to run her part way up the very steepest part of the
ravine I can find--the side of a house would do as well if it could
stand the strain. I'm going to stand the tank right up on her nose, so
to speak, and tip her over so she'll come right again."

Slowly the tank started off, while Tom and his friends in the
observation tower anxiously awaited the result of the novel progress.
Ned and Mr. Damon clung to the safety rings.  Tom put his arm through
one and hung on grimly, while he used both hands on the steering
apparatus and the controls.

Of course the trailer wheels were useless in a case of this kind, and
the tank had to be guided by the two belts run at varying speeds.

"Here we go!" cried Tom, and the tank started. It was a queer sensation
to be moving upside down, but it did not last very long. Tom steered
the tank straight at the opposite wall of the ravine, where it rose
steeply.  One of the broad belts ran up on that side. The other was
revolved in the opposite direction. Up and up, at a sickening angle,
went Tank A.

Slowly the tank careened, turning completely over on her longer axis,
until, as Tom shut off the power, he and his friends once more found
themselves standing where they belonged--on the floor of the
observation tower.

"Right side up with care!" quoted Ned, with a laugh. "Well, that was
some stunt--believe me!"

"Bless my corn plaster, I should say so!" cried Mr. Damon.

"Well, I'm glad it happened," commented Tom. "It showed what she can do
when she's put to it. Now we'll get out of this ditch."

Slowly the tank lumbered along, proper side up now, the men in the
motor room reporting that everything was all right, and that with the
exception of a slight unimportant break, no damage had been done.

Straight for the opposite steep side of the gully Tom directed his
strange craft, and at a point where the wall of the gulch gave a good
footing for the steel belts, Tank A pulled herself out and up to level
ground.

"Well, I'm glad that's over," remarked Ned, with a sigh of relief, as
the tank waddled along a straight stretch. "And to think of having to
do that same thing under heavy fire!"

"That's part of the game," remarked Tom. "And don't forget that we can
fire, too--or we'll be able to when I get the guns in place. They'll
help to balance the machine better, too, and render her less likely to
overturn."

Tom considered the test a satisfactory one and, a little later, guided
his tank back to the shop, where men were set to work repairing the
little damage done and making some adjustments.

"What's next on the program?" asked Ned of his chum one day about a
week later. "Any more tests in view?"

"Yes," answered Tom. "I've got the machine guns in place now. We are
going to try them out and also endeavor to demolish a building and some
barbed wire. Like to come along?"

"I would!" cried Ned.

A little later the tank was making her way over a field.  Tom pointed
toward a deserted factory, which had long been partly in ruins, but
some of the walls of which still stood.

"I'm going to bombard that," he announced, and then try to batter it
down and roll over it like a Juggernaut. Are you game?"

"Do your worst!" laughed Ned. "Let me man one of the machine guns!"

"All right," agreed Tom. "Concentrate your fire. Make believe you're
going against the Germans!"

Slowly, but with resistless energy, the tank approached the ruined
factory.

"Are you sure there's no one in it, Tom?"

"Sure! Blaze away!"




Chapter XV

Across Country


Ned Newton sighted his machine gun. Tom had showed him how to work it,
and indeed the young bank clerk had had some practice with a weapon
like this, erected on a stationary tripod. But this was the first time
Ned had attempted to fire from the tank while it was moving, and he
found it an altogether different matter.

"Say, it sure is hard to aim where you want to!" he shouted across to
Tom, it being necessary, even in the conning tower, where this one gun
was mounted, to speak loudly to make one's self heard above the hum,
the roar and rattle of the machinery in the interior of Tank A, and
below and to the rear of the two young men.

"Well, that's part of the game," Tom answered. "I'm sending her along
over as smooth ground as I can pick out, but it's rough at best. Still
this is nothing to what you'll get in Flanders."

"If I get there!" exclaimed Ned grimly. "Well, here goes!" and once
more he tried to aim the machine gun at the middle of the brick wall of
the ruined factory.

A moment later there was a rattle and a roar as the quick-firing
mechanism started, and a veritable hail of bullets swept out at the
masonry. Tom and Ned could see where they struck, knocking off bits of
stone, brick and cement.

"Sweep it, Ned! Sweep it!" cried Tom. "Imagine a crowd of Germans are
charging out at you, and sweep 'em out of the way!"

Obeying this command, the young man moved the barrel of the machine gun
from side to side and slightly up and down.  The effect was at once
apparent. The wall showed spatter-marks of the bullets over a wider
area, and had a body of Teutons been before the factory, or even inside
it, many of them would have been accounted for, since there were
several holes in the wall through which Ned's bullets sped, carrying
potential death with them.

"That's better!" shouted Tom. "That'll do the business!  Now I'm going
to open her up, Ned!"

"Open her up?" cried the young bank clerk, as he ceased firing.

"Yes; crack the wall of that factory as I would a nut!  Watch me take
it on high--that is, if the old tank doesn't go back on me!"

"You mean you're going to ride right over that building, Tom?"

"I mean I'm going to try! If Tank A does as I expect her to, she'll
butt into that wall, crush it down by force and weight, and then waddle
over the ruins. Watch!"

Tom sent some signals to the motor room. At once there was noticed an
increase in the vibrations of the ponderous machine.

"They're giving her more speed," said Tom. "And I guess we'll need it."

Straight for the old factory went Tank A. In spite of its ruined
condition, some of the walls were still firm, and seemed to offer a big
obstacle to even so powerful an engine of war as this monstrous tank.

"Get ready now, Ned," Tom advised. "And when I crack her open for you
cut loose with the machine gun again. This gun is supposed to fire
straight ahead and a little to either side. There are other guns at
left and right, amidships, as I might say, and there's also one in the
stern, to take care of any attack from that direction.

"The men in charge of them will fire at the same time you do, and it
will be as near like a real attack as we can make it--with the
exception of not being fired back at. And I wouldn't mind if such were
the case, for I don't believe anything, outside of heavy artillery,
will have any effect on this tank."

Tank A was now almost at her maximum speed as she approached closer to
the deserted factory. Ned and Tom, in the conning tower, saw the
largest of the remaining walls looming before them. Straight at it
rushed the ponderous machine, and the next moment there came a shock
which almost threw Ned away from his gun and back against the steel
wall behind him.

"Hold fast!" cried Tom. "Here we go! Fire. Ned! Fire!"

There was a crash as the blunt nose of the great war tank hit the wall
and crumpled it up.

A great hole was made in the masonry, and what was not crushed under
the caterpillar belts of the tank fell in a shower of bricks, stone and
cement on top of the machine.

Like a great hail storm the broken masonry pelted the steel sides and
top of the tank. But she felt them no more than does an alligator the
attacks of a colony of ants.  Right on through the dust the tank
crushed her way. Added to the noise of the falling walls was that of
the machine guns, which were barking away like a kennel of angry hounds
eager to be unleashed at the quarry.

Ned kept his gun going until the heat of it warned him to stop and let
the barrel cool, or he knew he would jam some of the mechanism. The
other guns were firing, too, and the bullets sent up little spatter
points of dust as they hit.

"Great jumping hoptoads!" yelled Ned above the riot of racket outside
and inside. "Feel her go, Tom!"

"Yes, she's just chewing it up, all right!" cried the young inventor,
his eyes shining with delight.

The tank had actually burst her way through the solid wall of the old
factory, permission to complete the demolition of which Tom had secured
from the owners. Then the great machine kept right on. She fairly
"walked" over the piles of masonry, dipped down into what had been a
basement, now partly filled with debris, and kept on toward another
wall.

"I'm going through that, too!" cried Tom.

And he did, knocking it down and sending his tank over the piled-up
ruins, while the machine guns barked, coughed and spluttered, as Ned
and the others inside the tank held back the firing levers.

Right through the opposite wall, as through the one she had already
demolished, the tank careened on her way, to emerge, rather battered
and dust-covered, on the other side of what was left of the factory.
And there was not much of it left. Tank A had well-nigh completed its
demolition.

"If there'd been a nest of Germans in there," said Tom, as he brought
the machine to a stop in a field beyond the factory, "they'd have
gotten out in a hurry."

"Or taken the consequences," added Ned, as he wiped the sweat from his
powder-blackened and oil-smeared face. "I certainly kept my gun going."

"Yes, and so did the others," reported one of the mechanics, as he
emerged from the "cubby hole," where the great motors had now ceased
their hum and roar.

"How'd she stand it?" asked Tom.

"All right inside," answered the man. "I was wondering how she looks
from the outside."

"Oh, it would take more than that to damage her," said Tom, with
pardonable pride. "That was pie for her! Solid concrete, which she may
have to chew up on the Western front, may present another kind of
problem, but I guess she'll be able to master that too. Well, let's
have a look."

He and Ned, with some of the crew and gunners, went outside the tank.
She was a sorry-looking sight, very different from the trim appearance
she had presented when she first left the shop. Bricks, bits of stone,
and piles of broken cement in chunks and dust lay thick on her broad
back. But no real damage had been done, as a hasty examination showed.

"Well, are you satisfied, Tom?" asked his chum.

"Yes, and more," was the answer. "Of course this wasn't the hardest
test to which she could have been submitted, but it will do to show
what punishment she can stand. Being shot at from big guns is another
matter. I'll have to wait until she gets to Flanders to see what effect
that will have. But I know the kind of armor skin she has, and that
doesn't worry me. There's one thing more I want to do while I have her
out now."

"What's that?" asked Ned.

"Take her for a long trip cross country, and then shove her through
some extra heavy barbed wire. I'm certain she'll chew that up, but I
want to see it actually done. So now, if you want to come along, Ned,
we'll go cross country."

"I'm with you!"

"Get inside then. We'll let the dust and masonry blow and rattle off as
we go along."

The tank started off across the fields, which stretched for many miles
on either side of the deserted factory, when suddenly Ned, who was
again at his post in the observation tower, called:

"Look, Tom!"

"What at?"

"That corner of the factory which is still standing. Look at those men
coming out and running away!"

Ned pointed, and his chum, leaning over from the steering wheel and
controls, gave a start of surprise as he saw three figures clambering
down over the broken debris and making their way out of what had once
been a doorway.

"Did they come out of the factory, Ned?"

"They surely did! And unless I miss my guess they were in it, or around
it, when we went through like a fellow carrying the football over the
line for a touchdown."

"In there when the tank broke open things?"

"I think so. I didn't see them before, but they certainly ran out as we
started away."

"This has got to be looked into!" decided Tom. "Come on, Ned! It may be
more of that spy business!"

Tom Swift stopped the tank and prepared to get out.




Chapter XVI

The Old Barn


"There's no use chasing after 'em, Tom," observed Ned, as the two chums
stood side by side outside the tank and gazed after the three men
running off across the fields as fast as they could go. "They've got
too much a start of us."

"I guess you're right, Ned," agreed Tom. "And we can't very well pursue
them in the tank. She goes a bit faster than anything of her build, but
a running man is more than a match for her in a short distance. If I
had the Hawk here, there'd be a different story to tell."

"Well, seeing that you haven't," replied Ned, "suppose we let them
go--which we'll have to, whether we want to or not--and see where they
were hiding and if they left any traces behind."

"That's a good idea," returned Tom.

The place whence the men had emerged was a portion of the old factory
farthest removed from the walls the tank had crunched its way through.
Consequently, that part was the least damaged.

Tom and Ned came to what seemed to have been the office of the building
when the factory was in operation. A door, from which most of the glass
had been broken, hung on one hinge, and, pushing this open, the two
chums found themselves in a room that bore evidences of having been the
bookkeeper's department. There were the remains of cabinet files, and a
broken letter press, while in one corner stood a safe.

"Maybe they were cracking that," said Ned.

"They were wasting their time if they were," observed Tom, "for the
combination is broken--any one can open it," and he demonstrated this
by swinging back one of the heavy doors.

A quantity of papers fell out, or what had been papers, for they were
now torn and the edges charred, as if by some recent fire.

"They were burning these!" cried Ned. "You can smell the smoke yet.
They came here to destroy some papers, and we surprised them!"

"I believe you're right," agreed Tom. "The ashes are still warm." And
he tested them with his hand. "They wanted to destroy something, and
when they found we were here they clapped the blazing stuff into the
safe, thinking it would burn there.

"But the closing of the doors cut off the supply of air and the fire
smouldered and went out. It burned enough so that it didn't leave us
very much in the way of evidence, though," went on Tom ruefully, as he
poked among the charred scraps.

"Maybe you can read some of 'em," suggested Ned.

"Part of the writing is in German," Tom said, as he looked over the
mass.  "I don't believe it would be worth while to try it.  Still, I
can save it.  Here, I'll sweep the stuff into a box, and if we get a
chance we can try to patch it together," and finding a broken box in
what had been the factory office the young inventor managed to get into
it the charred remains of the papers.

A further search failed to reveal anything that would be useful in the
way of evidence to determine what object the three men could have had
in hiding in the ruins, and Tom and Ned returned to the tank.

"What do you think about them, Tom?" asked Ned, as they were about to
start off once more for the cross-country test.

"Well, it seems like a silly thing to say--as if I imagined my tank was
all there was in this part of the country to make trouble--but I
believe those men had some connection with Simpson and with that spy
Schwen!"

"I agree with you!" exclaimed Ned. "And I think if we could get head or
tail of those burned papers we'd find that there was some
correspondence there between the man I saw up the tree and the workman
you had arrested."

"Too bad we weren't a bit quicker," commented Tom. "They must have been
in the factory when we charged it--probably came there to be in
seclusion while they talked, plotted and planned. They must have been
afraid to go out when the tank was walking through the walls."

"I guess that's it," agreed Ned. "Did you recognize any of the men,
Tom?"

"No, I didn't see 'em as soon as you did, and when they were running
they had their backs toward me. Was Simpson one?"

"I can't be sure. If one was, I guess he'll think we are keeping pretty
closely after him, and he may give this part of the country a wide
berth."

"I hope he does," returned Tom. "Do you know, Ned, I have an idea that
these fellows--Schwen Simpson, and those back of them, including
Blakeson--are trying to get hold of the secret of my tank for the
Germans."

"I shouldn't be surprised. But you've got it finished now, haven't you?
They can't get your patents away from you."

"No, it isn't that," said Tom. "There are certain secrets about the
mechanism of the tank--the way I've increased the speed and power, the
use of the spanners, and things like that--which would be useful for
the Germans to know. I wouldn't want them to find out these secrets,
and they could do that if they were in the tank a while, or had her in
their possession."

"They couldn't do that, Tom--get possession of her--could they?"

"There's no telling. I'm going to be doubly on the watch.  That fellow
Blakeson is in the pay of the plotters, I believe. He has a big machine
shop, and he might try to duplicate my tank if he knew how she was made
inside."

"I see! That's why he was inquiring about a good machinist, I suppose,
though he'll be mightily surprised when he learns it was you he was
talking to the time your Hawk met with the little mishap."

"Yes, I guess maybe he will be a bit startled," agreed Tom. "But I
haven't seen him around lately, and maybe he has given up."

"Don't trust to that!" warned Ned.

The tank was now progressing easily along over fields, hesitating not
at small or big ditches, flow going uphill and now down, across a
stretch of country thinly settled, where even fences were a rarity.
When they came to wooden ones Tom had the workmen get out and take down
the bars. Of course the tank could have crushed them like toothpicks,
but Tom was mindful of the rights of farmers, and a broken fence might
mean strayed cows, or the letting of cattle into a field of grain or
corn, to the damage of both cattle and fodder.

"There's a barbed-wire fence," observed Ned, as he pointed to one off
some distance across the field. "Why don't you try demolishing that?"

"Oh, it would be too easy!  Besides, I don't want the bother of putting
it up again. When I make the barbed-wire test I want some set up on
heavy posts, and with many strands, as it is in Flanders. Even that
won't stop the tank, but I'm anxious to see how she breaks up the wire
and supports--just what sort of a breach she makes. But I have a
different plan in mind now.

"I'm going to try to find a wooden building we can charge as we did the
masonry factory. I want to smash up a barn, and I'll have to pick out
an old one for choice, for in these war days we must conserve all we
can, even old barns."

"What's the idea of using a barn, Tom?"

"Well, I want to test the tank under all sorts of conditions--the same
conditions she'll meet with on the Western front. We've proved that a
brick and stone factory is no obstacle."

"Then how could a flimsy wooden barn be?"

"Well, that's just it. I don't think that it will, but it may be that a
barn when smashed will get tangled up in the endless steel belts, and
clog them so they'll jam. That's the reason I want to try a wooden
structure next."

"Do you know where to find one?"

"Yes; about a mile from here is one I've had my eyes on ever since I
began constructing the tank. I don't know who owns it, but it's such a
ramshackle affair that he can't object to having it knocked into
kindling wood for him. If he does holler, I can pay him for the damage
done. So now for a barn, Ned, unless you're getting tired and want to
go back?"

"I should say not! Speaking of barns, I'm with you till the cows come
home! Want any more machine gun work?"

"No, I guess not. This barn isn't particularly isolated, and the
shooting might scare horses and cattle. We can smash things up without
the guns."

The tank was going on smoothly when suddenly there was a lurch to one
side, and the great machine quickly swung about in a circle.

"Hello!" cried Ned. "What's up now? Some new stunt?"

"Must be something wrong," answered the young inventor.  "One of the
belts has stopped working. That's why we're going in a circle."

He shut off the power and hastened down to the motor room.  There he
found his men gathered about one of the machines.

"What's wrong?" asked Tom quickly.

"Just a little accident," replied the head machinist. "One of the boys
dropped his monkey wrench and it smashed some spark plugs. That caused
a short circuit and the left hand motor went out of business. We'll
have her fixed in a jiffy."

Tom looked relieved, and the machinist was as good as his word. In a
few minutes the tank was moving forward again. It crossed out to the
road, to the great astonishment of some farmers, and the fright of
their horses, and then Tom once more swung her into the fields.

"There's the old barn I spoke of," he remarked to Ned.  "It's almost as
bad a ruin as the factory was. But we'll have a go at it."

"Going to smash it?" asked Ned.

"I'm going right through it!" Tom cried.




Chapter XVII

Veiled Threats


Like some prehistoric monster about to charge down upon another of its
kind, Tank A, under the guidance of Tom Swift, reeled and bumped her
way over the uneven fields toward the old barn. Within the monster of
steel and iron were raucous noises: the clang and clatter of the
powerful gasolene motors; the rattle of the wheels and gears; all
making so much noise that, in the engine room proper, not a word could
be heard. Every order had to be given by signs, and Tom sent his
electric signals from the conning tower in the same way. When running
at full speed, it was almost impossible, even in the tower, which was
some distance removed from the engine room, to hear voices unless the
words were shouted.

"Why don't you go at it?" cried Ned to his "friend, who was peering
through the observation slot in the tower."

"I'm getting in good position," Tom answered. "Or rather, the worst
position I can find. I want to give the tank a good try-out, and I'm
going at the barn on the assumption that this is in enemy country and
that I can't pick and choose my advance.

"So I want to come up through that gully, and go at the barn from the
long way. That will be the worst possible way I could do it, and if old
Tank A stands the gaff I'll know she's a little bit nearer all right."

"I think she's all right as she is!" asserted Ned in a yell, for just
then Tom signaled for more speed, and the consequent increase in the
rattling and banging noises made it correspondingly difficult for talk
to be heard.

The big machine now tipped into the little gully spoken of by Tom. This
meant a dip downward, and then a climb out again and an attack on the
barn going uphill and at an angle. But, as the young inventor had said,
it would make a severe test and that was what he wanted to give his
ponderous machine.

Ned grasped one of the safety rings, as, with a reel to one side,
almost as if it were going to capsize, the tank rumbled on. Tom cast a
half-amused smile at his chum, and then threw over the guiding lever.

The tank rolled down into the gully. It was rough and filled with
stones and boulders, some of considerable size.  But Tank A made less
than nothing even of the largest rocks.  Some she crushed beneath her
steel belts. Others she simply "walked" over, smashing them down into
the soil.

Now the big machine reached the bottom of the gulch and started up the
sides, which, though not as steep as the trench in which she had
capsized, still were not easy going.

"Now for it!" cried Tom, as he signaled for full speed.

Up climbed the tank. Now she was halfway. A moment later, and she was
at the top, and then a forward careening motion told that she had
passed over the summit and was ready for the attack proper.

Ned gave a quick glance through the slot nearest him. He had a glimpse
of the barn, and then he saw something else.  This was the sight of a
man running away from the dilapidated structure--a man who glanced
toward the tank with a face that showed great fright.

"Stop! Stop!" yelled Ned. "There may be folks in there, Tom! I just saw
a man run out!"

"All right!" Tom cried, though Ned could hardly hear him.  "Tell me
when we get on the other side! We're going through now!"

"But," shouted Ned, "don't you understand? I saw a man come out of
there! Maybe there's more inside! Wait, Tom, and--"

But it was too late. The next instant there was a smashing, grinding,
splintering crash, a noise as of a thunder-clap, and Tank A fairly ate
her way through the old barn as a rat might eat his way into a soft
cheese, only infinitely more quickly.

On and on and through and through went the tank, knocking beams,
boards, rafters and timbers hither and thither.  Minding not at all the
weight of great beams on her back, caring nothing for those that got in
the way of her steel belts, heeding not the wall of wood that reared
itself before her in a barrier of splinters and slivers, Tank A went on
and on until finally, with another grinding crash, as she smashed her
way through the farthermost wall, the great engine of war emerged on
the other side and came panting into the field, dragging with her a
part of the structure clinging to her steel sides.

"Well," cried Tom, with a laugh, as he signaled for the power to be
shut off, thereby making it possible for ordinary conversation to be
heard, "I guess we didn't do a thing to that barn!"

"Not much left of it, for a fact, Tom," agreed Ned, as he looked
through the after observation slots at the ruin in the rear. "But
didn't you hear what I was saying?"

"I heard you yelling something to me, but I was too anxious to go at it
as fast as I could. I didn't want to stop then. What was the trouble?"

"That's what I'm afraid of, Tom--there may be trouble.  Just before you
tackled the barn for a knockdown, instead of a touchdown, as we might
say, I saw a man running out of it.  I thought if there was one there,
perhaps there might be more. That's why I yelled to you."

"A man running from the old barn!" cried Tom. "Whew!" he whistled. "I
wish I had seen him. But, Ned, if one ran out of harm's way, any others
who might possibly be in there would do the same thing, wouldn't they?"

"I hope so," returned Ned doubtfully.

"Great Scott!" cried Tom, as the possibility was borne home to him. "If
anything has happened--"

He sprang for the door of the tower and threw over the catch, springing
out, followed by Ned. From the engine room of the armored tank the men
came, smiles of gratification on their faces.

"We certainly busted her wide open, Mr. Swift!" called the chief
mechanician.

"Yes," assented the young inventor; but there was not as much
gratification in his voice as there should have been.  "There isn't
much of a barn left, but Ned thinks he saw some one run out, and if
there was one man there may have been more. We'd better have a look
around, I guess."

The engineering force exchanged glances. Then Hank Baldwin, who was in
charge of the motors, said:

"Well, if there was anybody in that barn when we chewed her up I
wouldn't give much for his hide, German or not."

"Let us hope no one was in there," murmured Tom.

They turned to go back to the demolished structure, fear and worry in
their hearts. No more complete ruin could be imagined. If a cyclone had
swept over the barn it could not have more certainly leveled it. And,
not only was it leveled, crushed down in the center by the great weight
of the tank, but the boards and beams were broken into small pieces.
Parts of them clung in long, grotesque splinters to the endless steel
belts.

"I don't see how we're going to find anybody if he's in there,"
remarked Hank.

"We'll have to," insisted Tom. "We can look about and call. If any one
is there he may have been off to one side or to one end, and be
protected under the debris. I wish I had heard you call, Ned."

"I wish you had, Tom. I yelled for all I was worth."

"I know you did. I was too eager to go on, and, at the same time, I
really couldn't stop well on that hill. I had to keep on going. Well,
now to learn the worst!"

They walked back toward the demolished barn. But they had not reached
it when from around the corner swung a big automobile. In it were
several men, but chief, in vision at least, among them, was a burly
farmer who had a long, old-fashioned gun in his hands. On his bearded
face was a grim look as he leaped out before the machine had fairly
stopped, and called:

"Hold on, there! I guess you've done damage enough! Now you can pay for
it or take the consequences!" And he motioned to Tom, Ned, and the
others to halt.




Chapter XVIII

Ready for France


Such was the reaction following the crashing through of the barn,
coupled with the sudden appearance of the men in the automobile and the
threat of the farmer, that, for the moment, Tom, Ned, or their
companions from the tank could say nothing. They just stood staring at
the farmer with the gun, while he grimly regarded them. It was Tom who
spoke first.

"What's the idea?" asked the young inventor. "Why don't you want us to
look through the ruins?"

"You'll learn soon enough!" was the grim answer.

But Tom was not to be put off with undecided talk.

"If there's been an accident," he said, "we're sorry for it. But delay
may be dangerous. If some one is hurt--"

"You'll be hurt, if I have my way about it!" snapped the farmer, "and
hurt in a place where it always tells. I mean your pocketbook! That's
the kind of a man I am--practical."

"He means if we've killed or injured any one we'll have to pay
damages," whispered Ned to Tom. "But don't agree to anything until you
see your lawyer. That's a hot one, though, trying to claim damages
before he knows who's hurt!"

"I've got to find out more about this," Tom answered. He started to
walk on.

"No you don't!" cried the farmer, with a snarl. "As I said, you folks
has done damage enough with your threshing machine, or whatever you
call it. Now you've got to pay!"

"We are willing to," said Tom, as courteously as he could.  "But first
we want to know who has been hurt, or possibly killed. Don't you think
it best to get them to a doctor, and then talk about money damages
later?"

"Doctor? Hurt?" cried the farmer, the other men in the auto saying
nothing. "Who said anything about that?"

"I thought," began Tom, "that you--"

"I'm talkin' about damages to my barn!" cried the farmer.  "You had no
right to go smashing it up this way, and you've got to pay for it, or
my name ain't Amos Kanker!"

"Oh!" and there was great relief in Tom's voice. "Then we haven't
killed any one?"

"I don't know what you've done," answered the farmer, and his voice was
not a pleasant one. "I'm sure I can't keep track of all your ructions.
All I know is that you've ruined my barn, and you've got to pay for it,
and pay good, too!"

"For that old ramshackle?" cried Ned.

"Hush!" begged Tom, in a low voice. "I'm willing to pay, Ned, for the
sake of having proved what my tank could do.  I'm only too glad to
learn no one was hurt. Was there?" he asked, turning to the farmer.

"Was there what?"

"Was there anybody in your barn?"

"Not as I knows on," was the grouchy answer. "A man who saw your
machine coming thought she was headed for my building, and he run and
told me. Then some friends of mine brought me here in their machine. I
tell you I've got all the evidence I need ag'in you, an' I'm going to
have damages! That barn was worth three thousand dollars if it was
worth a cent, and--"

"This matter can easily be settled," said Tom, trying to keep his
temper. "My name is Swift, and--"

"Don't get swift with me, that's all I ask!" and the farmer laughed
grimly at his clumsy joke.

"I'll do whatever is right," Tom said, with dignity. "I live over near
Shopton, and if you want to send your lawyer to see mine, why--"

"I don't believe in lawyers!" broke in the farmer. "All they think of
is to get what they can for theirselves. And I can do that myself. I'll
get it out of you before you leave, or, anyhow, before you take your
contraption away," and he glanced at the tank.

The same suspicion came at once to Tom and Ned, and the latter gave
voice to it when he murmured in a low voice to his chum:

"This is a frame-up--a scheme, Tom.  He doesn't care a rap for the
barn. It's some of that Blakeson's doing, to make trouble for you."

"I believe you!" agreed Tom. "Now I know what to do."

He looked toward the collapsed barn, as if making a mental computation
of its value, and then turned toward the farmer.

"I'm very sorry," said Tom, "if I have caused any trouble.  I wanted to
test my machine out on a wooden structure, and I picked your barn. I
suppose I should have come to you first, but I did not want to waste
time. I saw the barn was of practically no value."

"No value!" broke in the farmer. "Well, I'll show you, young man, that
you can't play fast and loose with other people's property and not
settle!"

"I'm perfectly willing to, Mr. Kanker. I could see that the barn was
almost ready to fall, and I had already determined, before sending my
tank through it, to pay the owner any reasonable sum. I am willing to
do that now."

"Well, of course if you're so ready to do that," replied the farmer,
and Ned thought he caught a glance pass between him and one of the men
in the auto, "if you're ready to do that, just hand over three thousand
dollars, and we'll call it a day's work. It's really worth more, but
I'll say three thousand for a quick settlement."

"Why, this barn," cried Ned, "isn't worth half that! I know something
about real estate values, for our bank makes loans on farms around
here--"

"Your bank ain't made me no loans, young man!" snapped Mr. Kanker. "I
don't need none. My place is free and clear! And three thousand dollars
is the price of my barn you've knocked to smithereens. If you don't
want to pay, I'll find a way to make you. And I'll hold you, or your
tank, as you call it, security for my damages! You can take your choice
about that."

"You can't hold us!" cried Tom. "Such things aren't done here!"

"Well, then, I'll hold your tank!" cried the farmer. "I guess it'll
sell for pretty nigh onto what you owe me, though what it's good for I
can't see. So you pay me three thousand dollars or leave your machine
here as security."

"That's the game!" whispered Ned. "There's some plot here.  They want
to get possession of your tank, Tom, and they've seized on this chance
to do it."

"I believe you," agreed the young inventor. "Well, they'll find that
two can play at that game. Mr. Kanker," he went on, "it is out of the
question to claim your barn is worth three thousand dollars."

"Oh, is it?" sneered the farmer. "Well, I didn't ask you to come here
and make kindling wood of it! That was your doings, and you've had your
fun out of it. Now you can pay the piper, and I'm here to make you
pay!" And he brought the gun around in a menacing manner.

"He's right, in a way," said Ned to his chum. "We should have secured
his permission first. He's got us in a corner, and almost any jury of
farmers around here, after they heard the story of the smashed barn,
would give him heavy damages.  It isn't so much that the barn is worth
that as it is his property rights that we've violated. A farmer's barn
is his castle, so to speak."

"I guess you're right," agreed Tom, with a rather rueful face. "But I'm
not going to hand him over three thousand dollars. In fact, I haven't
that much with me."

"Oh, well, I don't suppose he'd want it all in cash."

But, it appeared, that was just what the farmer wanted. He went over
all his arguments again, and it could not be denied that he had the law
on his side. As he rightly said, Tom could not expect to go about the
country, "smashing up barns and such like," without being willing to
pay.

"Well, what you going to do?" asked the farmer at last. "I can't stay
here all day. I've got work to do. I can't go around smashing barns. I
want three thousand dollars, or I'll hold your contraption for
security."

This last he announced with more conviction after he had had a talk
with one of the men in the automobile. And it was this consultation
that confirmed Tom and Ned in their belief that the whole thing was a
plot, growing out of Tom's rather reckless destruction of the barn; a
plot on the part of Blakeson and his gang. That they had so speedily
taken advantage of this situation carelessly given them was only
another evidence of how closely they were on Tom's trail.

"That man who ran out of the barn must have been the same one who was
in the factory," whispered Ned to his chum. "He probably saw us coming
this way and ran on ahead to have the farmer all primed in readiness.
Maybe he knew you had planned to ram the barn."

"Maybe he did. I've had it in mind for some time, and spoken to some of
my men about it."

"More traitors in camp, then, I'm afraid, Tom. We'll have to do some
more detective work. But let's get this thing settled. He only wants to
hold your tank, and that will give the man, into whose hands he's
playing, a chance to inspect her."

"I believe you. But if I have to leave her here I'll leave some men on
guard inside. It won't be any worse than being stalled in No Man's
Land. In fact, it won't be so bad. But I'll do that rather than be
gouged."

"No, Tom, you won't. If you did leave some one on guard, there'd be too
much chance of their getting the best of him.  You must take your tank
away with you."

"But how can I? I can't put up three thousand dollars in cash, and he
says he won't take a check for fear I'll stop payment. I see his game,
but I don't see how to block it."

"But I do!" cried Ned.

"What!" exclaimed Tom. "You don't mean to say, even if you do work in a
bank, that you've got three thousand in cash concealed about your
person, do you?"

"Pretty nearly, Tom, or what is just as good. I have that amount in
Liberty Bonds. I was going to deliver them to a customer who has
ordered them but not paid for them. They are charged up against me at
the bank, but I'm good for that, I guess. Now I'll loan you these
bonds, and you can give them to this cranky old farmer as security for
damages.  Mind, don't make them as a payment. They're simply
security--the same as when an autoist leaves his car as bail. Only we
don't want to leave our car, we'd rather have it with us," and he
looked over at the tank, bristling with splinters from the demolished
barn.

"Well, I guess that's the only way out," said Tom. "Lucky you had those
bonds with you. I'll take them, and give you a receipt for them. In
fact, I'll buy them from you and let the farmer hold them as security."

And this, eventually, was done. After much hemming and hawing and
consultation with the men in the automobile, Mr. Kanker said he would
accept the bonds. It was made clear that they were not in payment of
any damages, though Tom admitted he was liable for some, but that Uncle
Sam's war securities were only a sort of bail, given to indicate that,
some time later, when a jury had passed on the matter, the young
inventor would pay Mr. Kanker whatever sum was agreed upon as just.

"And now," said Tom, as politely as he could under the circumstances,
"I suppose we will be allowed to depart."

"Yes, take your old shebang offen my property!" ordered Mr. Kanker,
with no very good grace. "And if you go knocking down any more barns,
I'll double the price on you!"

"I guess he's a bit roiled because he couldn't hold the tank," observed
Ned to Tom, as they walked together to the big machine. "His
friends--our enemies--evidently hoped that was what could be done. They
want to get at some of the secrets."

"I suppose so," conceded Tom. "Well, we're out of that, and I've proved
all I want to."

"But I haven't--quite," said Ned.

"What's missing?" asked his chum, as they got back in the tank.

"Well, I'd like to make sure that the fellow who ran from the factory
was the same one I saw sneaking out of the barn.  I believe he was, and
I believe that Simpson's crowd engineered this whole thing."

"I believe so, too," Tom agreed. "The next thing is to prove it. But
that will keep until later. The main thing is we've got our tank, and
now I'm going to get her ready for France."

"Will she be in shape to ship soon?" asked Ned.

"Yes, if nothing more happens. I've got a few little changes and
adjustments to make, and then she'll be ready for the last test--one of
long distance endurance mainly.  After that, apart she comes to go to
the front, and we'll begin making 'em in quantities here and on the
other side."

"Good!" cried Ned. "Down with the Huns!"

Without further incident of moment they went back to the headquarters
of the tank, and soon the great machine was safe in the shop where she
had been made.

The next two weeks were busy ones for Tom, and in them he put the
finishing touches on his machine, gave it a long test over fields and
through woods, until finally he announced:

"She's as complete as I can make her!  She's ready for France!"




Chapter XIX

Tom is Missing


With Tom Swift's announcement, that his tank was at last ready for real
action, came the end of the long nights and days given over on the part
of his father, himself, and his men to the development and refinement
of the machine, to getting plans and specifications ready so that the
tanks could be made quickly and in large numbers in this country and
abroad and to the actual building of Tank A. Now all this was done at
last, and the first completed tank was ready to be shipped.

Meanwhile the matter of the demolished barn had been left for legal
action. Tom and Ned, it developed, had done the proper thing under the
circumstances, and they were sure they had foiled at least one plan of
the plotters.

"But they won't stop there," declared Ned, who had constituted himself
a sort of detective. "They're lying back and waiting for another
chance, Tom."

"Well, they won't get it at my tank!" declared the young inventor, with
a smile. "I've finished testing her on the road. All I need do now is
to run her around this place if I have to; and there won't be much need
of that before she's taken apart for shipment. Did you get any trace of
Simpson or the men who are with him--Blakeson and the others?"

"No," Ned answered. "I've been nosing around about that farmer, Kanker,
but I can't get anything out of him. For all that, I'm sure he was
egged on to his hold-up game by some of your enemies. Everything points
that way."

"I think you're right," agreed Tom. "Well, we won't bother any more
about him. When the trial comes on, I'll pay what the jury says is
right. It'll be worth it, for I proved that Tank A can eat up brick,
stone or wooden buildings and not get indigestion. That's what I set
out to do. So don't worry any more about it, Ned."

"I'm not worrying, but I'd like to get the best of those fellows. The
idea of asking three thousand dollars for a shell of a barn!"

"Never mind," replied Tom. "We'll come out all right."

Now that the Liberty Loan drive had somewhat slackened, Ned had more
leisure time, and he spent parts of his days and not a few of his
evenings at Tom Swift's. Mr. Damon was also a frequent visitor, and he
never tired of viewing the tank. Every chance he got, when they tested
the big machine in the large field, so well fenced in, the eccentric
man was on hand, with his "bless my--!" whatever happened to come most
readily to his mind.

Tom, now that his invention was well-nigh perfected, was not so worried
about not having the tank seen, even at close range, and the enclosure
was not so strictly guarded.

This in a measure was disappointing to Eradicate, who liked the
importance of strutting about with a nickel shield pinned to his coat,
to show that he was a member of the Swift & Company plant. As for the
giant Koku, he really cared little what he did, so long as he pleased
Tom, for whom he had an affection that never changed. Koku would as
soon sit under a shady tree doing nothing as watch for spies or
traitors, of whose identity he was never sure.

So it came that there was not so strict a guard about the place, and
Tom and Ned had more time to themselves. Not that the young inventor
was not busy, for the details of shipping Tank A to France came to him,
as did also the arrangements for making others in this country and
planning for the manufacture abroad.

It was one evening, after a particularly hard day's work, when Tom had
been making a test in turning the tank in a small space in the enclosed
yard, that the two young men were sitting in the machine shop,
discussing various matters.

The telephone bell rang, and Ned, being nearest, answered.

"It's for you, Tom," he said, and there was a smile on the face of the
young bank clerk.

"Um!" murmured Tom, and he smiled also.

Ned could not repress more smiles as Tom took up the conversation over
the wire, and it did not take long for the chum of the youthful
inventor to verify his guess that Mary Nestor was at the other end of
the instrument.

"Yes, yes," Tom was heard to say. "Why, of course, I'll be glad to come
over. Yes, he's here. What? Bring him along? I will if he'll come. Oh,
tell him Helen is there! 'Nough said! He'll come, all right!"

And Tom, without troubling to consult his friend, hung up the receiver.

"What's that you're committing me to?" asked Ned.

"Oh, Mary wants us to come over and spend the evening.  Helen Sever is
there, and they say we can take them downtown if we like."

"I guess we like," laughed Ned. "Come along! We've had enough of musty
old problems," for he had been helping Tom in some calculations
regarding strength of materials and the weight-bearing power of
triangularly constructed girders as compared to the arched variety.

"Yes, I guess it will do us good to get out," and the two friends were
soon on their way.

"What's this?" asked Mary, with a laugh, as Tom held out a package tied
with pink string. "More dynamite?" she added, referring to an incident
which had once greatly perturbed the excitable Mr. Nestor.

"If she doesn't want it, perhaps Helen will take it," suggested Ned,
with a twinkle in his eyes. "Halloran said they were just in fresh--"

"Oh, you delightful boy!" cried Helen. "I'm just dying for some
chocolates! Let me open them, Mary, if you're afraid of dynamite."

"The only powder in them," said Tom, "is the powdered sugar. That can't
blow you up."

And then the young people made merry, Tom, for the time being,
forgetting all about his tank.

It was rather late when the two young men strolled back toward the
Swift home, Ned walking that way with his chum.  Tom started out in the
direction of the building where the tank was housed.

"Going to have a good-night look at her?" asked Ned.

"Well, I want to make sure the watchman is on guard. We'll begin taking
her apart in a few days, and I don't want anything to happen between
now and then."

They walked on toward the big structure, and, as they approached from
the side, they were both startled to see a dark shadow--at least so it
seemed to the youths--dart away from one of the windows.

"Look!" gasped Ned.

"Hello, there!" cried Tom sharply. "Who's that? Who are you?"

There was no answer, and then the fleeing shadow was merged in the
other blackness of the night.

"Maybe it was the watchman making his rounds," suggested Ned.

"No," answered Tom, as he broke into a run. "If it was, he'd have
answered. There's something wrong here!"

But he could find nothing when he reached the window from which he and
Ned had seen the shadow dart. An examination by means of a pocket
electric light betrayed nothing wrong with the sash, and if there were
footprints beneath the casement they indicated nothing, for that side
of the factory was one frequently used by the workmen.

Tom went into the building, and, for a time, could not find the
watchman. When he did come upon the man, he found him rubbing his eyes
sleepily, and acting as though he had just awakened from a nap.

"This isn't any way to be on duty!" said Tom sharply.  "You're not paid
for sleeping!"

"I know it, Mr. Swift," was the apologetic answer. "I don't know what's
come over me to-night. I never felt so sleepy in all my life. I had my
usual sleep this afternoon, too, and I've drunk strong coffee to keep
awake."

"Are you sure you didn't drink anything else?"

"You know I'm a strict temperance man."

"I know you are," said Tom; "but I thought maybe you might have a cold,
or something like that."

"No, I haven't taken a thing. I did have a drink of soda water before I
came on duty, but that's all."

"Where'd you get it?" asked Tom.

"Well, a man treated me."

"Who?"

"I don't know his name. He met me on the street and asked me how to get
to Plowden's hardware store. I showed him--walked part of the way, in
fact--and when I left he said he was going to have some soda, and asked
me to have some. I did, and it tasted good."

"Well, don't go to sleep again," suggested Tom good-naturedly.  "Did
you hear anything at the side window a while ago?"

"Not a thing, Mr. Swift. I'll be all right now. I'll take a turn
outside in the air."

"All right," assented the young inventor.

Then, as he turned to go into the house and was bidding Ned good-night,
Tom said:

"I don't like this."

"What?" asked his chum.

"My sleepy watchman and the figure at the window. I more than half
suspect that one of Blakeson's tools followed Kent for the purpose of
buying him soda, only I think they might have put a drop or two of
chloral in it before he got it.  That would make him sleep."

"What are you going to do, Tom?"

"Put another man on guard. If they think they can get into the factory
at night, and steal my plans, or get ideas from my tank, I'll fool 'em.
I'll have another man on guard."

This Tom did, also telling Koku to sleep in the place, to be ready if
called. But there was no disturbance that night, and the next day the
work of completing the tank went on with a rush.

It was a day or so after this, and Tom had fixed on it as the time for
taking the big machine apart for shipment, that Ned received a
telephone message at the bank from Mr. Damon.

"Is Tom Swift over with you?" inquired the eccentric man.

"No. Why?" Ned answered.

"Well, I'm at his shop, and he isn't here. His father says he received
a message from you a little while ago, saying to come over in a hurry,
and he went. Says you told him to meet you out at that farmer Kanker's
place. I thought maybe--"

"At Kanker's place!" cried Ned. "Say, something's wrong, Mr. Damon!
Isn't Tom there?"

"No; I'm at his home, and he's been gone for some time.  His father
supposed he was with you. I thought I would telephone to make sure."

"Whew!" whistled Ned. "There's something doing here, all right, and
something wrong! I'll be right over!" he added, as he hung up the
receiver.




Chapter XX

The Search


"Haven't you seen anything of him?" asked Mr. Damon, as Ned jumped out
of his small runabout at the Swift home as soon as possible after
receiving the telephone message that seemed to presage something wrong.

"Seen him? No, certainly not!" answered the young bank clerk. "I'm as
much surprised as you are over it. What happened, anyhow?"

"Bless my memorandum pad, but I hardly know!" answered the eccentric
man. "I arrived here a little while ago, stopping in merely to pay Tom
a visit, as I often do, and he wasn't here. His father was anxiously
waiting for him, too, wishing to consult him about some shop matters.
Mr. Swift said Tom had gone out with you, or over to your house--I
wasn't quite sure which at first--and was expected back any minute.

"Then I called you up," went on Mr. Damon, "and I was surprised to
learn you hadn't seen Tom. There must be something wrong, I think."

"I'm sure of it!" exclaimed Ned. "Let's find Mr. Swift.  And what's
this about his going to meet me over at the place of that farmer, Mr.
Kanker, where we had the trouble about the barn Tom demolished?"

"I hardly know, myself. Perhaps Mr. Swift can tell us."

But Mr. Swift was able to throw but little light on Tom's
disappearance--whether a natural or forced disappearance remained to be
seen.

"No matter where he is, we'll get him," declared Ned. "He hasn't been
away a great while, and it may turn out that his absence is perfectly
natural."

"And if it's due to the plots of any of his rivals," said Mr. Damon,
"I'll denounce them all as traitors, bless my insurance policy, if I
don't! And that's what they are!  They're playing into the hands of the
enemy!"

"All right," said Ned. "But the thing to do now is to get Tom. Perhaps
Mrs. Baggert can help us."

It developed that the housekeeper was of more assistance in giving
information than was Mr. Swift.

"It was several hours ago," she said, "that the telephone rang and some
one asked for Tom. The operator shifted the call to the phone out in
the tank shop where he was, and Tom began to talk. The operator, as Tom
had instructed her, listened in, as Tom wants always a witness to most
matters that go on over his wires of late."

"What did she hear?" asked Ned eagerly.

"She heard what she thought was your voice, I believe," the housekeeper
said.

"Me!" cried the young bank clerk. "I haven't talked to Tom to-day, over
the phone or any other way. But what next?"

"Well, the operator didn't listen much after that, knowing that any
talk between Tom and you was of a nature not to need a witness. Tom
hung up and then he came in here, quite excited, and began to get ready
to go out."

"What was he excited about?" asked Mr. Damon. "Bless my unlucky stars,
but a person ought to keep calm under such circumstances! That's the
only way to do! Keep calm! Great Scott! But if I had my way, all those
German spies would be--Oh, pshaw! Nothing is too bad for them! It makes
my blood boil when I think of what they've done! Tom should have kept
cool!"

"Go on. What was Tom excited about?" Ned turned to the housekeeper.

"Well, he said you had called him to tell him to meet you over at that
farmer's place," went on Mrs. Baggert. "He said you had some news for
him about the men who had tried to get hold of some of his tank
secrets, and he was quite worked up over the chance of catching the
rascals."

"Whew!" whistled Ned. "This is getting more complicated every minute.
There's something deep here, Mr. Damon."

"I agree with you, Ned. And the sooner we find Tom Swift the better.
What next, Mrs. Baggert?"

"Well, Tom got ready and went away in his small automobile. He said
he'd be back as soon as he could after meeting you."

"And I never said a word to him!" cried Ned. "It's all a plot--a scheme
of that Blakeson gang to get him into their power. Oh, how could Tom be
so fooled? He knows my voice, over the phone as well as otherwise. I
don't see how he could be taken in."

"Let's ask the telephone operator," suggested Mr. Damon.  "She knows
your voice, too. Perhaps she can give us a clew."

A talk with the young woman at the telephone switchboard in the Swift
plant brought out a new point. This was that the speaker, in response
to whose information Tom Swift had left home, had not said he was Ned
Newton.

"He said," reported Miss Blair, "that he was speaking for you, Mr.
Newton, as you were busy in the bank. Whoever it was, said you wanted
Tom to meet you at the Kanker farm. I heard that much over the wire,
and naturally supposed the message came from you."

"Well, that puts a little different face on it," said Mr. Damon. "Tom
wasn't deceived by the voice, then, for he must have thought it was
some one speaking for you, Ned."

"But the situation is serious, just the same," declared Ned. "Tom has
gone to keep an appointment I never made, and the question is with whom
will he keep it?"

"That's it!" cried the eccentric man. "Probably some of those
scoundrels were waiting at the farm for him, and they've got him no one
knows where by this time!"

"Oh, hardly as bad as that," suggested Ned. "Tom is able to look out
for himself. He'd put up a big fight before he'd permit himself to be
carried off."

"Well, what do you think did happen?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I think they wanted to get him out to the farm to see if they couldn't
squeeze some more money out of him," was the answer. "Tom was pretty
easy in that barn business, and I guess Kanker was sore because he
haven't asked a larger sum.  They knew Tom wouldn't come out on their
own invitation, so they forged my name, so to speak."

"Can you get Tom back?" asked Mrs. Baggert anxiously.

"Of course!" declared Ned, though it must be admitted he spoke with
more confidence than he really felt. "We'll begin the search right
away."

"And if I can get my hands on any of those villains--" spluttered Mr.
Damon, dancing around, as Mrs. Baggert said, "like a hen on a hot
griddle," which seemed to describe him very well, "if I can get hold of
any of those scoundrels, I'll--I'll--Bless my collar button, I don't
know what I will do! Come on, Ned!"

"Yes, I guess we'd better get busy," agreed the young bank clerk. "Tom
has gone somewhere, that's certain, and under a misapprehension. It may
be that we are needlessly alarmed, or they may mean bad business. At
any rate, it's up to us to find Tom."

In Ned's runabout, which was a speedier car than that of the eccentric
man, the two set off for Kanker's farm. On the way they stopped at
various places in town, where Tom was in the habit of doing business,
to inquire if he had been seen.

But there was no trace of him. The next thing to do was to learn if he
had really started for the Kanker farm.

"For if he didn't go there," suggested Ned, "it will look funny for us
to go out there making inquiries about him. And it may be that after he
got that message Tom decided not to go."

Accordingly they made enough inquiries to establish the fact that Tom
had started for the farm of the rascally Kanker, who had been so
insistent in the matter of his almost worthless barn.

A number of people who knew Tom well had seen him pass in the direction
of Kanker's place, and some had spoken to him, for the young inventor
was well known in the vicinity of Shopton and the neighboring towns.

"Well, out to Kanker's we'll go!" decided Ned. "And if anything has
happened to Tom there--well, we'll make whoever is responsible wish it
hadn't!"

"Bless my fountain pen, but that's what we will!" chimed in Mr. Damon.

And so the two began the search for the missing youth.




Chapter XXI

A Prisoner


Amos Kanker came to the door of his farmhouse as Ned and Mr. Damon
drove up in the runabout. There was an unpleasant grin on the not very
prepossessing face of the farmer, and what Ned thought was a cunning
look, as he slouched out and asked:

"Well, what do you want? Come to smash up any more of my barns at three
thousand dollars a smash?"

"Hardly," answered Ned shortly. "Your prices are too high for such
ramshackle barns as you have. Where's Tom Swift?" he asked sharply.

"Huh! Do you mean that young whipper-snapper with his big traction
engine?" demanded Mr. Kanker.

"Look here!" blustered Mr. Damon, "Tom Swift is neither a
whipper-snapper nor is his machine a traction engine. It's a war tank."

"That doesn't matter much to me," said the farmer, with a grating
laugh. "It looks like a traction engine, though it smashes things up
more'n any one I ever saw."

"That isn't the point," broke in Ned. "Where is my friend, Tom Swift?
That's what we want to know."

"Huh! What makes you think I can tell you?" demanded Kanker.

"Didn't he come out here?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Not as I knows of," was the surly answer.

"Look here!" exclaimed Ned, and his tones were firm, with no bluster
nor bluff in them, "we came out here to find Tom Swift, and we're going
to find him! We have reason to believe he's here--at least, he started
for here," he substituted, as he wished to make no statement he could
not prove. "Now we don't claim we have any right to be on your
property, and we don't intend to stay here any longer than we can help.
But we do claim the right, in common decency, to ask if you have seen
anything of Tom. There may have been an accident; there may have been
foul play; and there may be international complications in this
business. If there are, those involved won't get off as easily as they
think.  I'd advise you to keep a civil tongue in your head and answer
our questions. If we have to get the police and detectives out here, as
well as the governmental department of justice, you may have to answer
their questions, and they won't be as decent to you as we are!"

"Hurray!" whispered Mr Damon to Ned. "That's the way to talk!"

And indeed the forceful remarks of the young bank clerk did appear to
have a salutary effect on the surly farmer.  His manner changed at once
and his grin faded.

"I don't know nothing about Tom Swift or any of your friends," he said.
"I've got my farm work to do, and I do it. It's hard enough to earn a
living these war times without taking part in plots. I haven't seen Tom
Swift since the trouble he made about my barn."

"Then he hasn't been here to-day?" asked Ned.

"No; and not for a good many days."

Ned looked at Mr. Damon, and the two exchanged uneasy glances. Tom had
certainly started for the Kanker farm, and indeed had come to within a
few miles of it. That much was certain, as testified to by a number of
residents along the route from Shopton, who had seen the young inventor
passing in his car.

Now it appeared he had not arrived. The changed air of the farmer
seemed to indicate that he was speaking the truth.  Mr. Damon and Ned
were inclined to believe him. If they had any last, lingering doubts in
the matter, they were dispelled when Mr. Kanker said:

"You can search the place if you like. I haven't any reason to feel
friendly toward you, but I certainly don't want to get into trouble
with the Government. Look around all you like."

"No, we'll take your word for it," said Ned, quickly concluding that
now they had got the farmer where they wanted him, they could gain more
by an appearance of friendliness than by threats or harsh words. "Then
you haven't seen him, either?"

"Not a sign of him."

"One thing more," went on Tom's chum, "and then we'll look farther.
Weren't you induced by a man named Simpson, or one named Blakeson, to
make the demand of three thousand dollars' damage for your barn?"

"No, it wasn't anybody of either of those names," admitted Mr. Kanker,
evidently a bit put out by the question.

"It was some one, though, wasn't it?" insisted Ned.

"Waal, a man did come to me the day the barn was smashed, and just
afore it happened, and said an all-fired big traction engine was headed
this way, and that a young feller who was half crazy was running it.
This man--I don't know who he was, being a stranger to me--said if the
engine ran into any of my property and did damages I should collect for
it on the spot, or hold the machine.

"Sure enough, that's what happened, and I did it. That man had an auto,
and he brought me and some of my men out to the smashed barn. That's
all I know about it."

"I thought some one put you up to it," commented Ned.  "This was some
of the gang's work," he went on to Mr. Damon.  "They hoped to get
possession of Tom's tank long enough to find out some of the secrets.
By having the Liberty Bonds, I fooled 'em."

"That's what you did!" said Mr. Damon. "But what can we do now?"

"I don't know," Ned was forced to admit. "But I should think we'd
better go back to the last place where he was seen to pass in his auto,
and try to get on his trail."

Mr. Damon agreed that this was a wise plan, and, after a casual look
around the farmhouse and other buildings on Kanker's place and finding
nothing to arouse their suspicions, the two left in Ned's speedy little
machine.

"It is mighty queer!" remarked the young bank clerk, as they shot along
the country road. "It isn't like Tom to get caught this way."

"Maybe he isn't caught," suggested the other. "Tom has been in many a
tight place and gotten out, as you and I well know.  Maybe it will be
the same now, though it does look suspicious, that fake message coming
from you."

"Not coming from me, you mean," corrected Ned. "Well, we'll do the best
we can."

They proceeded back to where they had last had a trace of Tom in his
machine, and there could only confirm what they had learned at first,
namely, that the young inventor had departed in the direction of the
Kanker farm, after having filled his radiator with water, and chatting
with a farmer he knew.

"Then this is where the trail divides," said Ned, as they went back
over the road, coming to a point where the highway branched off. "If he
went this way, he went to Kanker's place, or he would be in the way of
going. He isn't there, it seems, and didn't go there."

"If he took the other road, where would he go?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Any one of a dozen places. I guess we'll have to follow the trail and
make all the inquiries we can."

But from the point where the two roads branched, all trace of Tom Swift
was lost. No one had seen him in his machine, though he was known to
more than one resident along the highway.

"Well, what are we going to do?" asked Mr. Damon, after they had
traveled some distance and had obtained no news.

"Suppose we call up his home," suggested Ned, as they came to a country
store where there was a telephone. "It may be he has returned. In that
case, all our worry has gone for nothing."

"I don't believe it has," said Mr. Damon. "But if we call up and ask if
Tom is back it will show we haven't found him, and his father will be
more worried than ever."

"We can ask the telephone girl, and tell her to keep quiet about it,"
decided Ned; and this they did.

But the answer that came back over the wire was discouraging. For Tom
had not returned, and there was no word from him. There was an urgent
message for him, too, from government officials regarding the tank, the
girl reported.

"Well, we've just got to find him--that's all!" declared Ned. "I guess
we'll have to make a regular search of it. I did hope we'd find him out
at the Kanker farm. But since he isn't there, nor anywhere about, as
far as we can tell, we've got to try some other plan."

"You mean notify the authorities?"--asked Mr. Damon.

"Hardly that--yet. But I'll get some of Tom's friends who have
machines, and we'll start them out on the trail. In that way we can
cover a lot of ground."

Late that afternoon, and far into the night, a number of the friends of
Tom and Ned went about the country in automobiles, seeking news of the
young inventor. Mr. Swift became very anxious over the non-return of
his son, and felt the authorities should be notified; but as all agreed
that the local police could not handle the matter and that it would
have to be put into the hands of the United States Secret Service, he
consented to wait for a while before doing this.

All the next day the search was kept up, and Ned and Mr. Damon were
getting discouraged, not to say alarmed, when, most unexpectedly, they
received a clew.

They had been traveling around the country on little-frequented roads
in the hope that perhaps Tom might have taken one and disabled his
machine so that he was unable to proceed.

"Though in that case he could, and would, have sent word," said Ned.

"Unless he's hurt," suggested Mr. Damon.

"Well, maybe that is what's happened," Ned was saying, when they
noticed coming toward them a very much dilapidated automobile, driven
by a farmer, and on the seat beside him was a small, barefoot boy.

"Which is the nearest road to Shopton?" asked the man, bringing his
wheezing machine to a stop.

"Who are you looking for in Shopton?" asked Ned, while a strange
feeling came over him that, somehow or other, Tom was concerned in the
question.

"I'm looking for friends of a Tom Swift," was the answer.

"Tom Swift? Where is he? What's happened to him?" cried Ned.

"Bless my dyspepsia tablets!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "Do you know where
he is?"

"Not exactly," answered the farmer; "but here's a note from some one
that signs himself 'Tom Swift,' and it says he's a prisoner!"




Chapter XXII

Rescued


For a moment Ned and Mr. Damon gazed at the farmer in his rattletrap of
an auto, and then they looked at the fluttering piece of paper in his
hand. Thence their gaze traveled to the ragged and barefoot lad sitting
beside the farmer.

"I found it!" announced the boy.

"Found what?" asked Ned.

"That there note!"

Without asking any more questions, reserving them until they knew more
about the matter, Mr. Damon and Ned each reached out a hand for the
paper the farmer held. The latter handed it to Ned, being nearest him,
and at a sight of the handwriting the young bank clerk exclaimed:

"It's from Tom, all right!"

"What happened to him?" cried Mr. Damon. "Where is he? Is he a
prisoner?"

"So it seems," answered Ned. "Wait, I'll read it to you," and he read:


"'Whoever picks this up please send word at once to Mr. Swift or to Ned
Newton in Shopton, or to Mr. Damon of Waterfield. I am a prisoner,
locked in the old factory. Tom Swift'."


"Bless my quinine pills!" cried Mr Damon. "What in the world does it
mean?  What factory?"

"That's just what we've got to find out," decided Ned.  "Where did you
get this?" he asked the farmer's boy.

"Way off over there," and he pointed across miles of fields. "I was
lookin' for a lost cow, and I went past an old factory. There wasn't
nobody in the place, as far as I knowed, but all at once I heard some
one yell, and then I seen something white, like a bird, sail out of a
high window. I was scared for a minute, thinkin' it might be tramps
after me."

"And what did you do, Sonny?" asked Mr. Damon, as the boy paused.

"Well, after a while I went to where the white thing lay, and I picked
it up. I seen it was a piece of paper, with writin' on it, and it was
wrapped around part of a brick."

"And did you go near the factory to find out who called or who threw
the paper out?" Ned queried.

"I didn't," the boy answered. "I was scared. I went home, and didn't
even start to find the lost cow.

"No more he did," chimed in the farmer. "He come runnin' in like a
whitehead, and as soon as I saw the paper and heard what Bub had to
say, I thought maybe I'd better do somethin'."

"Did you go to the factory?" asked Ned eagerly.

"No. I thought the best thing to do would be to find this Mr. Swift, or
the other folks mentioned in this letter. I knowed, in a general way,
where Shopton was, but I'd never been there, doing my tradin' in the
other direction, and so I had to stop and ask the road. If you can tell
me--"

"We're two of the persons spoken of in that note," said Mr. Damon, as
he mentioned his name and introduced Ned. "We have been looking for our
friend Tom Swift for two days now.  We must find him at once, as there
is no telling what he may be suffering."

"Where is this old factory you speak of," continued Mr. Damon, "and how
can we get there? It's too bad one of you didn't go back, after finding
the note, to tell Tom he was soon to be rescued."

"Waal, maybe it is," said the farmer, a bit put out by the criticism.
"But I figgered it would be better to look up this young man's friends
and let them do the rescuin', and not lose no time, 'specially as it's
about as far from my place to the factory as it is to Shopton."

"Well, I suppose that's so," agreed Ned. "But what is this factory?"

"It's an old one where they started to make beet sugar, but it didn't
pan out," the farmer said. "The place is in ruins, and I did hear, not
long ago, that somebody run a threshin' machine through it, an' busted
it up worse than before."

"Great horned toads!" cried Ned. "That must be the very factory Tom ran
his tank through. And to think he should be a prisoner there!"

"Held by whom, do you suppose?" asked Mr. Damon.

"By that Blakeson gang, I imagine," Ned answered. "There's no time to
lose. We must go to his rescue!"

"Of course!" agreed Mr. Damon. "We're much obliged to you for bringing
this note," he went on to the farmer. "And here is something to repay
you for your trouble," and he took out his wallet.

"Shucks! I didn't do this for pay!" objected the farmer.  "It's a pity
I wouldn't help anybody what's in trouble!  If I'd a-knowed what it
meant, me and Bub here would have gone to the factory ourselves, maybe,
and done the work quicker.  But I didn't know--what with war times and
such-like--but that it would be better to deliver the note."

"It turns out as well, perhaps," agreed Ned. "We'll look after Tom now."

"And I'll come along and help," said the farmer. "If there's a gang of
tramps in that factory, you may need some reinforcements. I've got a
couple of new axe handles in my machine, and they'll come in mighty
handy as clubs."

"That's so," said Mr. Damon. "But I fancy Tom is simply locked in the
deserted factory office, with no one on guard.  We can get him out once
we get there, and we'll be glad to have you come with us. So if you
won't take any reward, maybe your boy will, as he found the note," and
Mr. Damon pressed some bills into the hands of the boy, who, it is
needless to say, was glad to get them.

It was a run of several miles back to the deserted factory, and though
they passed houses on the way, it was decided that no addition to their
force was necessary, though they did stop at a blacksmith shop, where
they borrowed a heavy sledge to batter down a door if such action
should be needed.

The farmer's rattletrap of a car, in spite of its appearance, was not
far behind Ned's runabout, and in a comparatively short time all were
within sight of the ruined place--a ruin made more complete by the
passage through it of Tom Swift's war tank.

"And to think of his being there all this while!" exclaimed Mr. Damon,
as he and Ned leaped from their machine.

"If he only is there!" murmured the young bank clerk.

"What do you mean? Didn't the note he threw out say he was there?"

"Yes, but something may have happened in the meanwhile.  Those
plotters, if they'd do a thing like this, are capable of anything. They
may have kidnapped Tom again."

"Anyway, we'll soon find out," murmured Ned, as they advanced toward
the ruin, Mr. Damon and the farmer each armed with an axe helve, while
Ned carried the blacksmith's sledge.

They went into the end of the factory that was less ruined than the
central part, where the tank had crashed through, and made their way
into what had been the office--the place where they had found the
burned scraps of paper.

"Hark!" exclaimed Ned, as they climbed up the broken steps. "I heard a
noise."

"It's him yellin'--like he did afore he threw out the note," said the
boy. Then, as they listened, they heard a distant voice calling:

"Hello! Hello, there! If that is any friend of mine, let me out, or
send word to Mr. Damon or Ned Newton! Hello!"

"Hello yourself, Tom Swift!" yelled Ned, too delighted to wait for any
other confirmation that it was his friend who was shouting. "We've come
to rescue you, Tom!"

There was a moment of silence, and then a voice asked:

"Who is there?"

"Ned Newton, Mr. Damon, and some other friends of yours!" answered the
young bank clerk, for surely the farmer and his son could be called
Tom's friends.

An indistinguishable answer came back, and then Ned cried:

"Where are you, Tom? Tell us, so we can get you out!"

They all listened, and faintly heard:

"I'm in some sort of an old vault, partly underground.  It's below what
used to be the office. There's a flight of steps, but be careful, as
they're rotten."

Eagerly they looked around  Mr. Damon saw a door in one corner of the
office, and tried to open it. It was locked, but a few blows from the
sledge smashed it, and then some steps were revealed.

Down these, using due caution, went Ned and the others, and at the
bottom they came upon another door. This was of sheet iron and was
fastened on the outside by a big padlock.

"Stand back!" cried Ned, as he swung the sledge, and with a few blows
broke the lock to pieces.

Then they pulled open the door, and into the light staggered Tom Swift,
a most woe-begone figure, and showing the effects of his imprisonment.
But he was safe and unharmed, though much disheveled from his attempts
to escape.

"Thank Heaven, you've come!" he murmured, as he clasped Ned's hand. "Is
the tank all right?"

"All right!" cried Ned. "And now tell us about yourself.  How in the
world did you get here?"

"It's quite a yarn," answered Tom. "I've got to pull myself together
before I answer," and he sank wearily down on a step, looking very
haggard and worn.




Chapter XXIII

Gone


"Here, eat some of this," and Ned held something out to his chum.
"It'll bring you up quicker than anything else, except a cup of hot
tea, and we'll get that as soon as you can get away from here," went on
the young bank clerk.

"What is it?" Tom asked, and his voice was very weary.

"It's a mixture of chocolate and nuts," replied Ned. "It's a new form
of emergency ration issued to soldiers before they go over the top. Our
Y.M.C.A. is sending a lot to the boys from around here who are in
France. I was helping pack the boxes ready for shipment, and I kept out
some to show you. Lucky I had it with me. Eat it, and you'll feel a lot
better in a few minutes. You haven't had much to eat, have you?"

"Very little," answered Tom, as he nibbled half-heartedly at the
confection Ned gave him, while Mr. Damon went out to the automobile and
came back with a thermos bottle filled with cool water. He always
provided himself with this on taking an automobile trip.

Tom managed to eat some of the chocolate, and then took a drink of the
cool water. In a little while he declared that he felt better.

"Then come out of here!" exclaimed Ned. "You can tell us how it all
happened and what they did to you. But I can see that last--they
treated you like a dog, didn't they?"

"Pretty nearly," answered Tom; "but they didn't have things all their
own way. I think I made one or two of them remember me," and he glanced
at his swollen and bruised hands. Indeed, he bore the marks of having
been in a fierce fight.

"Are you sure the tank's all right?" he asked Ned again.  "That has
been worrying me more than my own condition. I could think of only one
reason why they got me here and held me prisoner, and that was to get
me out of the way while they captured my tank. Then they haven't got
her?" he asked eagerly.

"Not a look at her," Ned answered. "She was safe in the shop when we
set out this morning."

"And now it's late afternoon," murmured Tom. "Well, I hope nothing has
happened since," and there was vague alarm in his voice, an alarm at
which Ned and Mr. Damon wondered.

"Couldn't you stop at some farmhouse and get fixed up a little?" asked
Mr. Kimball, the farmer who had brought the note to Ned and Mr. Damon.

"I need to get fixed up somewhere," replied Tom, with a rueful look at
himself--his hands, his torn clothes, and his general dilapidated
appearance. "But I don't want to lose any time. I'm afraid something
has happened at home, Ned."

"Nonsense! How could there, with Koko on guard, to say nothing of
Eradicate!"

"Well, maybe you're right," agreed Tom; "but I'll feel better when I
see my tank in her shed. Let's have some more of that concentrated
porterhouse steak of yours, Ned. It is good, and it fills out my
stomach, which was getting more intimate with my backbone than I liked
to feel."

More of the really good confection and another drink of refreshing
water made Tom feel better, and he was soon able to walk along without
staggering from weakness.

"And now let's get out of here," advised Ned, "unless you've left
something back in that vault you want, Tom," and he motioned to his
chum's late prison.

"Nothing there but bad memories," was the reply, with a rueful smile.
"I'm as ready to go as you are, Ned. It was good of you and Mr. Damon
to come for me, and you"--and he looked questioningly at Mr. Kimball.

"If it hadn't been for Mr. Kimball and his boy, we wouldn't have found
you--at least so soon," said Ned, and he told of the finding of the
note and what had followed.

"That's the only way I could think of for getting help," said Tom.
"They took every scrap of paper from me, but I found some in the lining
of my hat--some I'd stuffed in after I had a hair cut and my hat was
too large. For a pencil I used burnt matches. Oh, but I'm glad to be
out!" and he breathed deep of the fresh air.

"How did you get in there?" asked Ned wonderingly.

"Those fellows--of course. The German plotters, I'm going to call them,
for I believe that Blakeson and his gang--though I didn't see him--are
really working in the interests of Germany to get the secret of my
tank."

"Well, they haven't got her yet," said Ned, "and they're not likely to
now. Go on, Tom, if you feel able tell us in a few words what happened.
We've been trying to think, but can't."

"Well, it all happened because I didn't think enough," said Tom, who
was rapidly recovering his strength and nerve.  "When I got that
message that seemed to come from you, Ned, I should have known better
than to take a chance. But it seemed genuine, and as I had no reason to
suspect a trap, I started off at once. I thought maybe Kanker had
repented and was going to make amends for all the trouble he caused.

"Anyhow, I started off in my machine, and I hadn't got more than to the
crossroads when I saw a fellow out tinkering with his auto. Of course I
stopped to ask if I could help, for I can't bear to see any machinery
out of order, and as I was stooping over the engine to see what was
wrong I was pounced on from behind, bound and tied, and before I could
do a thing I was bundled into the car--a big limousine, and taken away.

"The crossroads was as far as we could trace you," remarked Ned.

"Well, it wasn't as far as they took me, by any means," Tom said. "They
brought me here, took me out of the machine--and I noticed that they'd
brought mine along--and then they carted me into the vault.

"But they didn't have it all their own way," said Tom grimly. "I
managed to get the ropes loose, and I had a regular knock down and drag
out with them for a while. But they were too many for me, and locked me
up in that place after taking away everything I had in my pockets."

"Were they highwaymen?" asked Mr. Kimtall.

"No, for they tossed back my money, watch and some trifles like that,"
Tom answered. "I didn't recognize any of the men, though one of them
must have known me, for when they had me tied I heard one of them ask
if I was the right party, and another said I was. I know they must
belong to the same gang that Simpson, Blakeson, and Schwen are members
of--the German spies."

"But what was their object?" asked Ned. "Did they try to force you to
tell them the secrets of the tank?"

"No; and that's the funny part which makes me so suspicious," Tom
answered. "If they'd tried to force something out of me, I would
understand it better. But they just kept me a prisoner after taking
away what papers I had."

"Were they of any value?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Not as regards the tank. That is, there was nothing of my plans of
construction, control or anything like that, though there was some
foreign correspondence that I am sorry fell into their hands. However,
that can't be helped."

"And did they just keep you locked up?" asked Ned.

"That's about all they did. After the fight--and it was some fight!"
declared Tom, as he recalled it with a shake of his head--"they left me
here with the door shut. There must have been some one on guard, for I
could faintly hear somebody moving about.

"I tried to get out, of course, but I couldn't. That vault must have
been made to hold something very valuable, for it was almost as strong
and solid as one in your bank, Ned.  The only window was placed so high
that I couldn't reach it, and it was barred at that.

"They opened the door a little, several times, to toss in once some old
bags that I made into a bed, and next they gave me a little water and
some sandwiches--German bologna sausage sandwiches, Ned! What do you
think of that--adding insult to injury?"

"That was tough!" Ned admitted.

"Well, I had to put up with it, for I was half starved, and as sore as
a boil from the fight. I didn't know what to do. I knew that you'd miss
me sooner or later, and set out to find me, but I hardly thought you'd
think of this place.  They couldn't have picked out a much better
prison to hold me, for, naturally, you wouldn't suppose enough of it
was left standing, after my tank had walked through it, to make a
hiding place.

"However, there was, and here I've been kept. At last I thought of the
plan of sending out a message on the scrap of paper I could tear out of
my hat. So I wrote it, and after several trials I managed to toss it
out of the window. Then I just had to wait, and that was the hardest of
all. The last twelve hours I've been without food, and I haven't heard
any one around, so I guess they've skipped out and don't intend to come
back."

"We didn't see any one," Ned reported. "Maybe they became frightened,
Tom."

"I wish I could think that," was the answer. "What is more likely to be
the case is that they're up to some new tricks.  I must get back home
quickly."

And after a stop had been made at a farmhouse belonging to a business
acquaintance of Ned's, where Tom was able to wash and get a cup of hot
tea, which added to his recuperative powers, the young inventor, with
Ned and Mr. Damon, set out for Shopton.

Before Mr. Kimball started for his home, renewed thanks had been made
to the farmer and his son for the part they had played in the rescue,
and the young inventor, learning that the boy had a liking for things
mechanical, promised to aid him in his intention to become a machinist.

"But first get a good education," Tom advised. "Keep on with your
school work, and when the time comes I'll take you into my shop."

"And maybe he'll make a tank that will rival yours, Tom," said Ned.

"Maybe he will! I hope he does. If he comes along fast enough, he can
help with something else I'm going to start soon."

"Whats that?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Oh, it's something on the same order, designed to help batter down the
German lines," Tom answered. "I haven't quite made up my mind what to
call it yet. But let's get home. I want to see that my tank is safe.
The absence of the plotters from the factory makes me suspicious."

On the way back Tom told more of the details of the attack.

"But we'll forget about it all, now you're out," remarked Ned.

"And the sooner we get home, the better," added Tom. "Can't you get a
little more speed out of this machine?" he asked.

"Well, it isn't the Hawk," replied Ned, "but we'll see what we can do,"
and he made the runabout fairly fly.

Mrs. Baggert was the first to greet Tom as they arrived at his home.
She did not seem as surprised as either Tom, Ned or Mr. Damon expected
her to be.

"Well, I'm glad you're all right," she said. "And it's a good thing you
sent that note, for your father was so excited and worried I was
getting apprehensive about him."

"What note?" asked Tom, while a queer look came into his face.

"Why, the one you sent saying you were detained on business and would
probably not be home for a week, and to have Koku and the men bring the
tank to you."

"Bring the tank! A note from me!" exclaimed Tom. "The plotters again!
And they've got the tank!"

He ran to the big shop followed by the others. Throwing open the doors,
they went inside. A glance sufficed to disclose the worst.

The place where the great tank had stood was empty.

"Gone!" gasped Tom.




Chapter XXIV

Camouflaged


Two utterances Tom Swift made when the fact of the disappearance of the
tank became known to him were characteristic of the young inventor. The
first was:

"How did they get it away?"

And the second was:

"Come on, let's get after 'em!"

Then, for a few moments, no one said anything. Tom, Ned, and Mr. Damon,
with Mrs. Baggert in the background, stood looking at the great empty
machine shop.

"Well, they got her," went on Tom, with a sigh. "I was afraid of this
as soon as they left me alone at the factory."

"Is anything wrong?" faltered the housekeeper. "Didn't you send for the
tank, Tom?"

"No, Mrs. Baggert, I didn't," Tom answered.

"But I don't understand," the housekeeper said. "A man came with a note
from you, Tom, and in it you said to have him take the tank, with Koku
and the men who know how to run it. We were so glad to hear from you,
and know that you were all right, that we didn't think of anything
else, your father and I. So he went out and saw that the tank got off
all right. Koku was glad, for it's the first chance he'd had to ride in
it."

"Who was the man who brought the note?" asked Tom, and he was striving
to be calm. "To think of poor old dad playing right into the hands of
the plotters!" he added, in an aside to Ned.

"Well, I don't know who the man was," said Mrs. Baggert.  "He seemed
all right, and of course having a note from you--"

"Who has that note now?" asked Tom quickly.

"Your father."

"Come on," and Tom led the way back to the house. "I'll have a look at
that document, which of course I never wrote, and then we'll get after
the plotters and the tank."

"She ought to be easy to trace," observed Mr. Damon.  "Bless my
fountain pen, but she ought to be easy to trace!  She will leave a
track like a giant boa constrictor crawling along."

"Yes, I guess we can trace her, all right," assented Tom Swift; "but
the point is, will there be anything left of her? That's what I'm
afraid of now."

Mr. Swift was still excited, but his worry had subsided as soon as he
knew Tom was safe.

"The whole thing is a forgery, but fairly well done," Tom said, as he
looked at the paper his father gave him--a brief note stating that Tom
was well, but detained on business, and that the tank was to be brought
to him, just where the bearer of the note would indicate. Koku, the
giant, and several of the machinists, who knew how to operate the big
machine, were to go with it, the note said.

"That made me sure everything was all right," said Mr. Swift. "I knew,
of course, Tom, that plotters might try to get hold of your war secret,
but I didn't see how they could if Koku and some of your own men were
in possession."

"They couldn't--as long as they remained in possession," Tom said. "But
that's the trouble. I'm afraid they haven't.  What has probably
happened is that under the direction of this man, who brought the
forged note from me, Koku and the others took the tank where he
directed them, thinking to meet me. Then, reaching the place where the
rest of the plotters were concealed, they overpowered Koku and the
others and took possession of the machine."

"They'd have trouble with Koku," suggested Ned.

"Yes, but even a giant can't fight too big a crowd, especially if he is
taken by surprise, and that's probably what happened," remarked Tom.
"Now the question is where is the tank, and how can we get her back?
Every minute counts.  If those German spies and their helpers remain in
possession long, they'll find out enough of my secrets to enable them
to duplicate the machine, and especially some of the most exclusive
features. We've got to get after 'em!"

"They imitated your writing pretty well, Tom," Observed Ned, as he
looked at the forged note.

"Yes; that's why they took all my papers away from me--to get specimens
of my handwriting. I half suspected that, but I didn't quite figure out
what their game was. Well, we know the worst now, and that's better
than working in the dark.  Now I'm going to have a bath and get into
some decent clothes, and we'll see what we can do."

"Count on me, Tom!" exclaimed Ned. "I'll go the limit with you!"

"I knew you would, old man!"

"And me, too!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my open fireplace, but I'll send
word to my wife that I'm not coming home to-night, and we can start the
first thing in the morning, Tom."

"Yes; there isn't much use in going now, as it will soon be dark."

"How are you going to trace the tank, Tom?" asked Ned, when his chum
had bathed and gotten into fresh clothes.

"I'm going to tour the country around here in an auto. The tank can
make ten miles an hour, but that's nothing to what an auto can do. And
we oughtn't to have much trouble in tracing her. No one whose house she
passed would forget her in a hurry."

"That's so," agreed Ned. "But if they took her across country--"

"A different story," agreed Tom. "Come to think of it, maybe we'd
better start to-night, Ned. We can make inquiries after dark as well as
by daylight and get ready for an early morning hunt."

"Let's do it, then!" suggested his chum. "I'm ready. I'll send word
that I'll not be home to-night."

"Good!" cried the young inventor. "We'll have an old-fashioned hunt
after our enemies, Ned!"

"And don't leave me out!" begged Mr. Damon. Hurried preparations were
made for the night trip. Tom ordered out one of his speediest, though
not largest, automobiles, and told his helper to get the Hawk ready, to
have her so she could start at a moment's notice if needed.

"You're not going in her, are you, Tom?" asked Ned.

"I may need her to-morrow for daylight hunting. If the tank's hidden
somewhere, I can spot her from above more easily than from the ground.
So if we get any trace of my machine, I can phone in and have the
aeroplane brought to me."

"That's a good idea!"

Inquiry at the shop where the tank had been built and kept disclosed
the fact that, in addition to Koku, three of Tom's men had gone in her
to help manage the machine under the direction of the man who bore the
forged note. That he was one of the plotters not hitherto observed by
either Ned or Tom seemed certain.

"And they took Koku and some of the men merely to make it look natural
and as if it were all right," Tom said.  "Naturally that deceived my
father, who thought, of course, that I was waiting for the machine.
Well, it was a slick trick, Ned, but we may fool them yet."

"I hope so, Tom."

Night had fully fallen when Tom, Ned, and Mr. Damon started away in the
touring car.

Out onto the road rolled the automobile. During the little daylight
that had remained after his arrival at home and following the discovery
of the loss of the tank Tom and Ned had traced it, by the marks of the
big steel caterpillar belts, to the main road. It had gone along that
some distance, just how far could not be said.

"But by using the searchlight of the auto we can trace her as long as
they keep her on the road," said Tom. "After that we'll have to trust
to luck, and to what inquiries we can make."

The touring car carried a powerful lamp, and by its gleams it was easy
to trace for a time the progress of the ponderous tank. There was no
need to make inquiries of persons living along the way, though once or
twice Tom did get out to ask, confirming the fact that the big machine
had rumbled past in a direction away from the Swift home.

"I had an idea they might have doubled on their tracks for a time, and
backed her up just to fool us," Tom said. "They might do that, keeping
her in the same tracks."

But this, evidently, had not been done, and the tank was making good
speed away from the Swift house. They kept up the search until about
midnight, and then a heavy rain began just before they reached a point
where several roads branched.

"Luck's with them!" exclaimed Tom. "This will wash away the marks, and
we'll have to go it blind. Might as well put up here for the night," he
added, as they came to a village hotel.

It was evident that little more could be done in the rain and darkness,
and there was danger of over-running the trail of the tank if they kept
on. So they turned in at the hotel and got what little rest they could
in their anxious state of minds.

Tom tried to be cheerful and to look for the best, but it was hard
work. The tank was his pet invention, and, moreover, that her secrets
should fall into the hands of the enemy and be used for Germany and
against the United States eventually, made the young inventor feel that
everything was going wrong.

The rain kept up all night, and this would make it correspondingly hard
for them to pick up the trail in the morning.

"The only thing we can do is to make inquiries," decided Tom.
"Fortunately, the tank can't easily be hidden."

They started off after an early breakfast. The roads were so muddy and
wet that traveling was difficult and dangerous for the automobile, and
they were disappointed in finding no one who had seen or heard the tank
pass up to a point not far from the hotel where they had stayed
overnight. From then on the big machine seemed to have disappeared.

"I know what they've done," Tom said, when noon came and they had found
no trace of the ponderous war machine.  "They've left the road and
taken her cross country, and we can't find the spot where they did this
because the rain has washed out the marks. Well, there's only one thing
left to do."

"What's that?" asked Ned.

"Get the Hawk! In that we can look down and over a big extent of
country. That's what I'll do--I'll phone for the airship. The rain is
stopping, I think."

The rain did cease by the time one of Tom's men brought the speedy
aircraft to the place named by the young inventor in his telephone
message. There were still several hours of daylight left, and Tom
counted on them to allow him to rise in the air and look down on the
tanks possible hiding place.

"One thing's sure," he told Ned: "I know the limit of her speed, and
she can't be farther off than at some place within a circle of about
one hundred and twenty-five miles from my house. And it's in the
direction we're in. So if I circle around up above, I may spot her."

"I hope so," murmured Ned.

It was arranged that Mr. Damon should take the automobile back, with
Tom's mechanician in it, and Tom and Ned would scout around in the
aircraft, which carried only two.

"You ought to have a machine gun with you, Tom, if you plan to attack
those fellows to get back the tank," Ned said.

"Oh, I don't imagine I'll need it," he said. "Anyhow, a machine gun
wouldn't be of much effect against the tank. And they can't fire on us,
for there wasn't any ammunition for the guns in Tank A, unless they got
some of their own, and I hardly believe they'd do that. I'll take a
chance, anyhow."

And so the search from the air began. It was disappointing at first.
Around and around circled Tom and Ned, their eyes peering eagerly down
from the heights for a sight of the tank, possibly hidden in some
little-known ravine or gully.

Back and forth, like a speck in the sky, Tom guided the Hawk, while Ned
took observation after observation with the binoculars.

At last, when the low-sinking sun gave warning that night would soon be
upon them, Ned's glasses picked up something on the ground far below
that made him sit suddenly straighter in his seat.

"What is it?" asked Tom through the speaking apparatus, feeling the
movement on the part of his chum.

"I see something down there, Tom," was the answer. "It doesn't look
like the tank, and yet it doesn't look as a clump of trees and bushes
ought to look. Have a peep yourself. It's just beyond that river,
against the side of the hill--a lonesome place, too."

Tom took the glasses while Ned assumed control of the Hawk, there being
a dual system for operating and steering her.

No sooner had the young inventor got the focus on what Ned had
indicated than he gave a cry.

"What is it?" asked the young bank clerk.

"Camouflaged!" cried Tom, and without stopping to explain what he
meant, he handed the binoculars back to Ned and began to guide the Hawk
down toward the earth at high speed.




Chapter XXV

Foiled


"Is it really Tank A, Tom?" cried Ned, through the tube, as soon as he
became aware of his companion's intention.  "Are you sure?"

"That's the girl, and just where you spotted her with the glasses--in
that clump of bushes. But they've daubed her with green and brown
paint--camouflaged her, so to speak--until she looks like part of the
landscape. What made you suspicious of that particular place?"

"The green was such a bright one in contrast to the rest of the foliage
around it.'

"That's what struck me," Tom answered, as he continued to drive the
Hawk earthward. "They thought they were doing a smart trick--imitating
the tactics of the Allies with their tanks--but they must be color
blind."

Ned took another observation through the glasses. He could see the tank
more easily now. There she was, fairly well hidden in a clump of bushes
and small trees on the banks of a river, about a hundred miles away
from Shopton. It was in a wild and desolate country, and only with the
airship could the trail have thus been followed.

Ned saw that the tank had been daubed with green, yellow, and brown
paint, in fantastic blotches, to make the big machine blend with the
foliage; and, to a certain extent, this had been accomplished.

But, as Ned had remarked, the green used was of too vivid a hue. No
natural tree put forth leaves like that, and the glass had further
revealed the error.

"Look, Tom!" suddenly cried Ned. "She's moving!"

"You're right!" answered the young inventor. "They've seen us and are
trying to get away."

"But they can't beat your airship, Tom."

"I know that. But their game--Oh, Ned, they're going to wreck her!"
cried Tom, and there was anguish in his voice.

As the two looked down from their seats In the Hawk they saw the tank,
in its fantastic dress of splotchy paint, leave her lair amid the
bushes and trees, and head toward the river. Like some ponderous
prehistoric monster about to take a drink, she careened her way toward
the stream, which, at this point, ran between high banks.

"What's the game?" cried Ned.

"They're going to send her to smash!" cried Tom. "She's pretty tough,
Tom, but she'll never stand a tumble down into the river without
breaking a lot of machinery inside her."

"But if they demolish the tank they'll kill themselves, won't they?
And Koku and your men, too, who must be prisoners in her!"

"They won't risk their own worthless hides, you may be sure of that!"
exclaimed Tom.

"There they go, but they must have left Koku and the others to their
fate!"

"Oh, if they could only get loose and take control now, Tom, they'd
save your tank for you!" shouted Ned.

"Yes; but they can't, I'm afraid. They may be killed, or so securely
bound that they can't get loose!"

"Can't you get the Hawk there in time to stop her?"

"I'm afraid not. By that time she'll have attained top speed and it
would be taking our lives in our hands to try to make a flying jump,
get inside, and shut off the motors."

"Then the tank's got to smash!" said Ned gloomily.

Tom did not answer for a moment. He and his chum watched the fleeing
figures running away from the war engine. What the plotters had done,
as soon as they saw the aircraft and realized that Tom had discovered
them, was to start the motors and leap from the tank, closing the doors
after them.  Whether or not they had left Koku and the others prisoners
inside remained to be seen.

But the tank was plunging her way toward the steep bank of the river,
doomed, it seemed, to great damage, if not to destruction.

"Oh, if we could only halt her!" murmured Ned.

Tom Swift was busy with some apparatus on the Hawk. Ned heard the hum
of an electric motor which was connected with the engine, and there
soon sounded the crackle of the wireless.

"What are you doing? Signaling for help from those inside the tank?"
asked Ned, for the big machine was fitted to receive and send messages
of this sort.

"I'm trying something more desperate than that," Tom answered.

Again the wireless crackled, Tom working it with one hand while, with
the other, he guided the aircraft. Ned looked downward with wondering
eyes.

The tank was still plunging her way toward the steep bank of the river.
If she tumbled down this, there would be little left of the expensive
and complicated machinery inside.

"The rascals did their work well," mused Ned. "They've probably gotten
all the secrets they want and now they're going to spoil all Tom's hard
work. It's a shame! If only--"

Ned ceased his musing. Something was taking place down below that he
could not explain. The tank seemed to be slackening her progress. More
and more slowly she approached the edge of the cliff.

"Tom! Tom!" yelled Ned. "You must have waked some of them up inside and
they've thrown the motors out of gear! Hurrah!  She's stopping!"

"I believe she is!" yelled Tom. "Oh, if it only works!"

The tank was still moving, though more slowly. Still the crackle of the
wireless was heard.

And then, just as Tom shut off his own motor and let the Hawk glide on
her downward way in a volplane to earth, the great, ponderous tank came
to a stop, on the very edge of the precipice at the foot of which
rolled the river.

"Whew!" whistled Ned, as the aircraft rolled along the ground near the
war machine. "That was touch and go, Tom!  They stopped her just in
time."

"You mean the wireless stopped her," said Tom quietly.  "I'm very much
afraid that if Koku and the others are alive they're still prisoners in
the craft."

"The wireless!" gasped Ned, as he and his chum got out of the Hawk. "Do
you mean that you stopped her by wireless, Tom?"

"That's what I did. It was a desperate chance, but I took it. I had
just installed in the tank a system of wireless control, so she could
be guided as some torpedos and submarines are, by wireless impulses
from the shore.

"Only I'd never given the tank system a tryout. It was all installed,
and had worked perfectly on the small model I constructed. And when I
saw her running away, out of control as she was, I realized the
wireless was the only thing that would stop her, if that would. It
might operate just opposite to what I wanted, though, and increase her
speed."

"But I took the chance. I set the airship wireless current to working,
and tuned it in to coincide with the control of the tank. Then, by
means of the wireless impulse I shut off the motors, which can be
stopped or started by hand or by electricity. I shut 'em off."

"And only just in time!" cried Ned. "Whew, Tom Swift, but that was a
close call!"

"I realize that myself!" said the young inventor. "This is a new idea
and has to be worked out further for our newer tanks."

"Gee!" ejaculated Ned. "Out of date before got into use!  Now let's see
about our friends!"

It was the work of but a moment to enter the tank, and, after making
sure that the machinery was all right, Tom and Ned made their way to
the interior. In one of the smallest rooms they found Koku and the
others bound with ropes, and in a bad way. Koku was so tied with cords
and hemp as to resemble a bale of Manilla cable.

"Cut 'em loose, Ned!" cried Tom, and the bonds were soon severed. Then
came explanations.

As has been told, one of the plotters, whose identity was not learned
until later, came with the forged note. The giant and Tom's men set out
in the tank, and the machine was stopped at a certain place where the
plotter, who gave the name of Crossleigh, told them Tom was to meet his
men.

Out of ambush leaped Simpson and others, who overpowered the mechanics,
even subduing Koku after a fierce fight, and then they took possession
of the tank, making the others prisoners.

What happened after that could only be conjectured by Tom's men, for
they were shut up in an inner room. It seemed certain, though, that the
tank was taken to some secret place and there painted to resemble the
verdure. Then she went on again, coming to rest where Tom and Ned saw
her.

Meanwhile the plotters were gradually getting at the secrets of
construction, and they were in the midst of this work when one of them
saw the aeroplane. Rightly guessing what it portended, they left
hurriedly, still leaving the hapless men bound, and started the tank on
what they thought would be her last trip.

"But you saved her, Tom!" cried Ned. "You saved her with the wireless."

And word was sent back to Shopton by the same means to tell Mr. Swift,
Mr. Damon, and the others that Tom and his tank were safe. And then, a
little later, when the bound men had recovered the use of their cramped
limbs, the tank was backed away from the ledge and started on her
homeward way, Tom and Ned preceding her in the Hawk.

Without further incident, save a slight break which was soon repaired,
Tank A soon reached her harbor again, and a double guard was posted
about the shop.

"And they won't get much more chance to steal her secrets," said Tom
that night, when the stories had been told.

"Why?" asked Ned.

"We start to dismantle her at once," Tom answered, "and she goes to
England to be reproduced for France."

"If only those plotters haven't stolen the secrets," mused Ned.

But if they had they got little good of them. For shortly afterward
government secret service agents rounded up the chief members of the
gang, including Simpson and Blakeson.  They, with Schwen, were sent to
an internment camp for the period of the war, and enough information
was obtained from them to disclose all the workings of the plot.

"It was just like lots of other stunts the German spies tried to put
over on the good old U.S.A.," said Tom to Ned, the day after the
dismantled tank was shipped to Great Britain. "In some way the spies
found out what I was making, and then they got hold of Blakeson and
Grinder. Those fellows, who so nearly queered me in the big tunnel game
promised to make a tank that would beat those the British at first put
out, and they took some German money in advance for doing it.

"When they found they couldn't make good, the German spies agreed to
help them get possession of my secrets. They worked hard enough at it,
too, but, thanks to you, Ned, and to Eradicate, who gave us the tip on
Schwen, we beat 'em out."

"And so it's all over, Tom?"

"Yes, practically all over. I've given all my interests in the tank to
Uncle Sam. It was the only way I could do my bit, at this time. But
I've something else up my sleeve."

And those of you who care to learn what the young inventor next did may
do so by reading the next volume of this series.

It was about a week after Tank A, as she was still officially called,
had been shipped in sections that Ned Newton called at Tom's home. He
found his chum, with a flower in his buttonhole, about to leave in his
small runabout.

"Oh, excuse me!" exclaimed Ned. "This is Wednesday night.  I might have
known. Give Mary my regards."

"I will," promised Tom, with a smile.

========================================
========================================

TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL

or

The Hidden City of the Andes


by

Victor Appleton




CONTENTS

     I  An Appeal for Aid
    II  Explanations
   III  A Face at the Window
    IV  Tom's Experiments
     V  Mary's Present
    VI  Mr. Nestor's Letter
   VII  Off for Peru
  VIII  The Bearded Man
    IX  The Bomb
     X  Professor Bumper
    XI  In the Andes
   XII  The Tunnel
  XIII  Tom's Explosive
   XIV  Mysterious Disappearances
    XV  Frightened Indians
   XVI  On the Watch
  XVII  The Condor
 XVIII  The Indian Strike
   XIX  A Woman Tells
    XX  Despair
   XXI  A New Explosive
  XXII  The Fight
 XXIII  A Great Blast
  XXIV  The Hidden City
   XXV  Success




TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL




Chapter I

An Appeal for Aid


Tom Swift, seated in his laboratory engaged in trying to solve a
puzzling question that had arisen over one of his inventions, was
startled by a loud knock on the door. So emphatic, in fact, was the
summons that the door trembled, and Tom started to his feet in some
alarm.

"Hello there!" he cried. "Don't break the door, Koku!" and then he
laughed. "No one but my giant would knock like that," he said to
himself. "He never does seem able to do things gently. But I wonder why
he is knocking. I told him to get the engine out of the airship, and
Eradicate said he'd be around to answer the telephone and bell. I
wonder if anything has happened?"

Tom shoved back his chair, pushed aside the mass of papers over which
he had been puzzling, and strode to the door.  Flinging it open he
confronted a veritable giant of a man, nearly eight feet tall, and big
in proportion. The giant, Koku, for that was his name, smiled in a
good-natured way, reminding one of an overgrown boy.

"Master hear my knock?" the giant asked cheerfully.

"Hear you, Koku? Say, I couldn't hear anything else!" exclaimed Tom.
"Did you think you had to arouse the whole neighborhood just to let me
know you were at the door? Jove!  I thought you'd have it off the
hinges."

"If me break, me fix," said Koku, who, from his appearance and from his
imperfect command of English, was evidently a foreigner.

"Yes, I know you can fix lots of things, Koku," Tom went on, kindly
enough. "But you musn't forget what enormous strength you have. That's
the reason I sent you to take the engine out of the airship. You can
lift it without using the chain hoist, and I can't get the chain hoist
fast unless I remove all the superstructure. I don't want to do that.
Did you get the engine out?"

"Not quite. Almost, Master."

"Then why are you here? Has anything gone wrong?"

"No, everything all right, Master.  But man come to machine shop and
say he must have talk with you. I no let him come past the gate, but I
say I come and call you."

"That's right, Koku. Don't let any strangers past the gate. But why
didn't Eradicate come and call me. He isn't doing anything, is he?
Unless, indeed, he has gone to feed his mule, Boomerang."

"Eradicate, he come to call you, but that black man no good!" and Koku
chuckled so heartily that he shook the floor of the office.

"What's the matter with Eradicate?" asked Tom, somewhat anxiously. "I
hope you and he haven't had another row?" Eradicate had served Tom and
his father long before Koku, the giant, had been brought back from one
of the young inventor's many strange trips, and ever since then there
had been a jealous rivalry between the twain as to who should best
serve Tom.

"No trouble, Master," said Koku. "Eradicate he start to come and tell
you strange man want to have talk, but Eradicate he no come fast
enough. So I pick him up, and I set him down by gate to stand on guard,
and I come to tell you. Koku come quick!"

"Oh, I knew it must be something like that!" exclaimed Tom in some
vexation. "Now I'll have Eradicate complaining to me that you mauled
him. Picked him up and set him down again."

"Sure. One hand!" boasted the giant. "Eradicate him not be heavy. More
as a sack of flour now."

"No, poor Eradicate is getting pretty old and thin," commented Tom. "He
can't move very quickly. But you should have let him come, Koku. It
makes him feel badly when he thinks he can't be of service to me any
more."

"Man say he in hurry." The giant spoke softly, as though he felt the
gentle rebuke Tom administered. "Koku run quick tell you--bang on door."

"Yes, you banged all right, Koku. Well, it can't be helped, I reckon.
Where is this strange man? Who is he? Did you ever see him before?"

"Me no can tell, Master. Not sure. But him now be at the outer gate.
Eradicate watch."

"All right. I'll go and see who it is. I don't want any strangers
poking around here, especially with the plans of my new gyroscope lying
in plain view."

Before he left the laboratory Tom swept into a desk drawer the mass of
papers and blue prints, and locked the receptacle.

"No use taking any chances," he remarked. "I've had too much trouble
with people trying to get inside information about dad's and my
patents. Now, Koku, I'll go and see this man."

The buildings composing the plant of Tom Swift and his father at
Shopton were enclosed by a high, board fence, and at one of the
entrances was a sort of gate-house, where some one was always on guard.
Only those who could give a good account of themselves, workmen in the
plant, or those known to the sentinel were admitted.

It happened that the colored man, Eradicate, was on guard at the gates
this day when the stranger asked to see Tom.  Koku, working on the
airship engine not far away, saw the stranger. Hearing the man say he
was in a hurry and noting the slow progress of the aged Eradicate, who
was troubled with rheumatism, the giant took matters into his own hands.

Tom Swift entered the gate-house and saw, seated in a chair, a man who
was impatiently tapping the floor with his thick-soled shoe.

"Looks like a detective or a policeman in disguise," thought Tom, for,
almost invariably, members of this profession wear very thick-soled
shoes. Opposite the stranger sat Eradicate, a much-injured look on his
honest, black face.

"Oh, Massa Tom!" exclaimed Eradicate, as soon as the young inventor
entered. "Dat Koku he--he--he done gone and cotch me by de collar ob
mah coat, an' den he lif' me up, an' he sot me down so hard--so
hard--dat he jar loose all mah back teef!" and Eradicate opened his
mouth wide to display his gleaming ivories.

"Eradicate, he no can come quick. He walk like so fashion!" and Koku,
who had followed the young inventor, imitated the limping gait of the
colored man with such a queer effect that Tom could not help laughing,
and the stranger smiled.

"Ef I gits holt on yo'--ef I does, yo' great, big, overgrown lummox,
Ah'll--Ah'll--" began the colored man, stammeringly.

"There. That will do now!" interrupted Tom. "Don't quarrel in here.
Koku, get back to that engine and lift out the motor. Eradicate, didn't
father tell you to whitewash the chicken coops to-day?"

"Dat's what he done, Massa Tom."

"Well, go and see about that. I'll stay here for a while, and when I
leave I'll call one of you, or some one else, to be on guard. Skip now!"

Having thus disposed of the warring factions, Tom turned to the
stranger and after apologizing for the little interruption, asked:

"You wished to see me?"

"If you're Tom Swift; yes."

"Well, I'm Tom Swift," and the young owner of the name smiled.

"I hope you will pardon a stranger for calling on you," resumed the
man, "but I'm in a lot of trouble, and I think you are the only one who
can help me out."

"What sort of trouble?" Tom inquired.

"Contracting trouble--tunnel blasting, to be exact. But if you have a
few minutes to spare perhaps you will listen to my story. You will then
be better able to understand my difficulty."

Tom Swift considered a moment. He was used to having appeals for help
made to him, and usually they were of a begging nature. He was often
asked for money to help some struggling inventor complete his machine.

In many cases the machines would have been of absolutely no use if
perfected. In other cases the inventions were of the utterly hopeless
class, incapable of perfection, like some perpetual motion apparatus.
In these cases Tom turned a deaf ear, though if the inventor were in
want our hero relieved him.

But this case did not seem to be like anything Tom had ever met with
before.

"Contracting trouble--blasting," repeated the youth, as he mused over
what he had heard.

"That's it," the man went on. "Permit me to introduce myself" and he
held out a card, on which was the name

MR. JOB TITUS


Down in the lower left-hand corner was a line:

"Titus Brothers, Contractors."

"I am glad to meet you, Mr. Titus," Tom said warmly, offering his hand.
"I don't know anything about the contracting business, but if you do
blasting I suppose you use explosives, and I know a little about them."

"So I have heard, and that's why I came to you," the contractor went
on. "Now if you'll give me a few minutes of your time--"

"You had better come up to the house," interrupted Tom.  "We can talk
more quietly there."

Calling a young fellow who was at work near by to occupy the
gate-house, Tom led Mr. Titus toward the Swift homestead, and, a little
later, ushered him into the library.

"Now I'll listen to you," the youth said, "though I can't promise to
aid you."

"I realize that," returned Mr. Titus. "This is a sort of last chance
I'm taking. My brother and I have heard a lot about you, and when he
wrote to me that he was unable to proceed with his contract of
tunneling the Andes Mountains for the Peruvian government, I made up my
mind you were the one who could help us if you would."

"Tunneling the Andes Mountains!" exclaimed Tom.

"Yes. The firm represented by my brother and myself have a contract to
build a railroad for the Peruvian government. At a point some distance
back in the district east of Lima, Peru, we are making a tunnel under
the mountain. That is, we have it started, but now we can't advance any
further."

"Why not?"

"Because of the peculiar character of the rock, which seems to defy the
strongest explosive we can get. Now I understand you used a powder in
your giant cannon that--"

Mr. Titus paused in his explanation, for at that moment there arose
such a clatter out on the front piazza as effectually to drown
conversation. There was a noise of the hoofs of a horse, the fall of a
heavy body, a tattoo on the porch floor and then came an excited shout:

"Whoa there! Whoa! Stop! Look out where you're kicking!  Bless my
saddle blanket! Ouch! There I go!"




Chapter II

Explanations


"What in the world is that?" cried Mr. Job Titus, in alarm.

Tom Swift did not answer. Instead he jumped up from his chair and ran
toward the front door. Mr. Titus followed.  They both saw a strange
sight.

Standing on the front porch, which he seemed to occupy completely, was
a large horse, with a saddle twisted underneath him. The animal was
looking about him as calmly as though he always made it a practice to
come up on the front piazza when stopping at a house.

Off to one side, with a crushed hat on the back of his head, with a
coat split up the back, with a broken riding crop in one hand and a
handkerchief in the other, sat a dignified, elderly gentleman.

That is, he would have been dignified had it not been for his position
and condition. No gentleman can look dignified with a split coat and a
crushed hat on, sitting under the nose of a horse on a front piazza,
with his raiment otherwise much disheveled, while he wipes his
scratched and bleeding face with a handkerchief.

"Bless my--bless my--" began the elderly gentleman, and he seemed at a
loss what particular portion of his anatomy or that of the horse, to
bless, or what portion of the universe to appeal to, for he ended up
with: "Bless everything, Tom Swift!"

"I heartily agree with you, Mr. Damon!" cried Tom. "But what in the
world happened?"

"That!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, pointing with his broken crop at the horse
on the piazza. "I was riding him when he ran away--just as my
motorcycle tried to climb a tree. No more horses for me! I'll stick to
airships," and slamming his riding crop down on the porch floor with
such force that the horse started back, Mr. Damon arose, painfully
enough if the contortions on his face and his grunts of pain went for
anything.

"Let me help you!" begged Tom, striding forward. "Mr. Titus, perhaps
you will kindly lead the horse down off the piazza?"

"Certainly!" answered the tunnel contractor. "Whoa now!" he called
soothingly, as the steed evinced a disposition to sit down on the side
railing. "Steady now!"

The horse finally allowed himself to be led down the broad front steps,
sadly marking them, as well as the floor of the piazza, with his sharp
shoes.

"Ouch! Oh, my back!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, as Tom helped him to stand up.

"Is it hurt?" asked Tom, anxiously.

"No, I've just got what old-fashioned folks call a 'crick' in it,"
explained the elderly horseman. "But it feels more like a river than a
'crick.' I'll be all right presently."

"How did it happen?" asked Tom, as he led his guest toward the hall.
Meanwhile Mr. Titus, wondering what it was all about, had tied the
horse to a post out near the street curb, and had re-entered the
library.

"I was riding over to see you, Tom, to ask you if you wouldn't go to
South America with me," began Mr. Damon, rubbing his leg tenderly.

"South America?" cried Tom, with a sudden look at Mr. Titus.

"Yes, South America. Why, there isn't anything strange in that, is
there? You've been to wilder countries, and farther away than that."

"Yes, I know--it's just a coincidence. Go on."

"Let me get where I can sit down," begged Mr. Damon. "I think that
crick in my back is running down into my legs, Tom. I feel a bit weak.
Let me sit down, and get me a glass of water. I shall be all right
presently."

Between them Tom and Mr. Titus assisted the horseman into an easy
chair, and there, under the influence of a cup of hot tea, which Mrs.
Baggert, the housekeeper, insisted on making for him, he said he felt
much better, and would explain the reason for his call which had
culminated in such a sensational manner.

And while Mr. Damon is preparing his explanation I will take just a few
moments to acquaint my new readers with some facts about Tom Swift, and
the previous volumes of this series in which he has played such
prominent parts.

Tom Swift was the son of an inventor, and not only inherited his
father's talents, but had greatly added to them, so that now Tom had a
wonderful reputation.

Mr. Swift was a widower, and he and Tom lived in a big house in
Shopton, New York State, with Mrs. Baggert for a housekeeper. About the
house, from time to time, shops and laboratories had been erected,
until now there was a large and valuable establishment belonging to Tom
and his father.

The first volume of this series is entitled, "Tom Swift and His Motor
Cycle." It was through a motor cycle that Tom became acquainted with
Mr. Wakefield Damon, who lived in a neighboring town. Mr. Damon had
bought the motor cycle for himself, but, as he said, one day in riding
it the machine tried to climb a tree near the Swift house.

The young inventor (for even then he was working on several patents)
ministered to Mr. Damon, who, disgusted with the motor cycle, and
wishing to reward Tom, let the young fellow have the machine.

Tom's career began from that hour. For he learned to ride the motor
cycle, after making some improvements in it, and from then on the youth
had led a busy life. Soon afterward he secured a motor boat and from
that it was but a step to an airship.

The medium of the air having been conquered, Tom again turned his
attention to the water, or rather, under the water, and he and his
father made a submarine. Then he built an electric runabout, the
speediest car on the road.

It was when Ton Swift had occasion to send his wireless message from a
lonely island where he had been shipwrecked that he was able to do Mr.
and Mrs. Nestor a valuable service, and this increased the regard which
Miss Mary Nestor felt for the young inventor, a regard that bid fair,
some day, to ripen into something stronger.

Tom Swift might have made a fortune when he set out to discover the
secret of the diamond makers. But Fate intervened, and soon after that
quest he went to the caves of ice, where he and his friends met with
disaster. In his sky racer Tom broke all records for speed, and when he
went to Africa to rescue a missionary, had it not been for his electric
rifle the tide of battle would have gone against him and his party.

Marvelous, indeed, were the adventures underground, which came to Tom
when he went to look for the city of gold, but the treasure there was
not more valuable than the platinum which Tom sought in dreary Siberia
by means of his air glider.

Tom thought his end had come when he fell into captivity among the
giants; but even that turned out well, and he brought two of the giants
away with him. Koku, one of the two giants, became devotedly attached
to the lad, much to the disgust of Eradicate Sampson, the old negro who
had worked for the Swifts for a generation, and who, with his mule
Boomerang, "eradicated" from the place as much dirt as possible.

With his wizard camera Tom did much to advance the cause of science.
His great searchlight was of great help to the United States government
in putting a stop to the Canadian smugglers, while his giant cannon was
a distinct advance in ordnance, not excepting the great German guns
used in the European war.

When Tom perfected his photo telephone the last objection to rendering
telephonic conversation admissible evidence in a law court was done
away with, for by this invention a person was able to see, as well as
to hear, over the telephone wire. One practically stood face to face
with the person, miles away, to whom one was talking.

The volume immediately preceding this present one is called: "Tom Swift
and His Aerial Warship." The young inventor perfected a marvelous
aircraft that was the naval terror of the seas, and many governments,
recognizing what an important part aircraft were going to play in all
future conflicts, were anxious to secure Tom's machine. But he was true
to his own country, though his rivals were nearly successful in their
plots against him.

The Mars, which was the name of Tom's latest craft, proved to be a
great success, and the United States government purchased it. It was
not long after the completion of this transaction that the events
narrated in the first chapter of this book took place.

Mr. Damon and Tom had been firm friends ever since the episode of the
motor cycle, and the eccentric gentleman (who blessed so many things)
often went with Tom on his trips.  Besides Mary Nestor, Tom had other
friends. The one, after Miss Nestor, for whom he cared most (if we
except Mr. Damon) was Ned Newton, who was employed in a Shopton bank.
Ned also had often gone with Tom, though lately, having a better
position, he had less time to spare.

"Well, do you feel better, Mr. Damon?" asked Tom, after a bit.

"Yes, very much, thank you. Bless my pen wiper! but I thought I was
done for when I saw my horse bolt for your front stoop. He rushed up
it, fell down, but, fortunately, I managed to get out of his way,
though the saddle girth slipped. And all I could think of was that my
wife would say: 'I told you so!' for she warned me not to ride this
animal.

"But he never ran away with me before, and I was in a hurry to get over
to see you, Tom. Now then, let's get down to business. Will you go to
South America with me?"

"Whereabout in South America are you going, Mr. Damon, and why?" Tom
asked.

"To Peru, Tom."

"What a coincidence!" exclaimed Mr. Titus.

"I beg your pardon?" said Mr. Damon, interrogatively.

"I said what a coincidence. I am going there myself."

"Excuse me," interposed Tom, "I don't believe, in the excitement of the
moment, I introduced you gentlemen. Allow me--Mr. Damon--Mr. Titus."

The presentation over, Mr. Damon went on:

"You see, Tom, I have lately invested considerable money in a wholesale
drug concern. We deal largely in Peruvian remedies, principally the
bark of the cinchona tree, from which quinine is made. Of late there
has been some trouble over our concession from the Peruvian government,
and the company has decided to send me down there to investigate.

"Of course, as soon as I made up my mind to go I thought of you. So I
came over to see if you would not accompany me.  All went well until I
reached your front gate. Then my horse became frightened by a yellow
toy balloon some boy was blowing up in the street and bolted with me. I
suppose if it had been a red or green balloon the effect would have
been the same. However, here I am, somewhat the worse for wear.  Now
Tom, what do you say? Will you go to South America--to Peru--with me,
and help look up this Quinine business?"

Once more Mr. Titus and Tom looked at each other.




Chapter III

A Face at the Window


"What is the matter?" asked Mr. Damon, catching the glance between Tom
and the contractor. "Is there anything wrong with South America--Peru?
I know they have lots of revolutions in those countries, but I don't
believe Peru is what they call a 'banana republic'; is it?"

"No," and Mr. Titus shook his head. "It isn't a question of
revolutions."

"But it's something!" insisted Mr. Damon. "Bless my ink bottle! but
it's something. As soon as I mention Peru, Tom, you and Mr. Titus eye
each other as if I'd said something dreadful. Out with it! What is it?"

"It's just--just a coincidence," Tom said. "But go on, Mr. Damon.
Finish what you have to say and then we'll explain."

"Well, I guess I've told you all you need to know for the present. I
went into this wholesale drug concern, hoping to make some money, but
now, on account of the trouble down in Peru, we stand to lose
considerable unless I can get back the cinchona concession."

"What does that mean?" Tom asked.

"Well, it means that our concern secured from the Peruvian government
the right to take this quinine-producing bark from the trees in a
certain tropical section. But there has been a change in the government
in the district where our men were working, and now the privilege, or
concession, has been withdrawn. I'm going down to see if I can't get it
back. And I want you to go with me."

"And I came here for very nearly the same thing," went on Mr. Titus.
"That is where the coincidence comes in. It is strange that we should
both appeal to Mr. Swift at the same time."

"Well, Tom's a valuable helper!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "I know him of
old, for I've been on many a trip with him."

"This is the first time I have had the pleasure of meeting him,"
resumed the tunnel contractor, "but I have heard of him. I did not ask
him to go to South America for us. I only wanted to get some superior
explosive for my brother, who is in charge of driving the railroad
tunnel through a spur of the Andes. I look after matters up North here,
but I may have to go to Peru myself.

"As I told Mr. Swift, I had read of his invention of the giant cannon
and the special powder he used in it to send a projectile such a
distance. The cannon is now mounted as one of the pieces of ordnance
for the defense of the Panama Canal, is it not?" he asked Tom.

The young inventor nodded in assent.

"Having heard of you, and the wonderful explosive used in your big
cannon," the contractor went on, "I wrote to my brother that I would
try and get some for him.

"You see," he resumed, "this is the situation. Back in the Andes
Mountains, a couple of hundred miles east of Lima, the government is
building a short railroad line to connect two others. If this is done
it will mean that the products of Peru--quinine bark, coffee, cocoa,
sugar, rubber, incense and gold can more easily be transported. But to
connect the two railroad lines a big tunnel must be constructed.

"My brother and I make a specialty of such work, and when we saw bids
advertised for, our firm put in an estimate.  There was some trouble
with a rival firm, which also bid, but we secured the contract, and
bound ourselves to have the tunnel finished within a certain time, or
forfeit a large sum.

"That was over a year ago. Since then our men, aided by the native
Indians of Peru, have been tunneling the mountain, until, about a month
back, we struck a snag."

"What sort of snag?" Tom asked.

"A snag in the shape of extra hard rock," replied the tunnel
contractor. "Briefly, Paleozoic rocks make up the eastern part of the
Andean Mountains in Peru, while the western range is formed of Mesozoic
beds, volcanic ashes and lava of comparatively recent date. Near the
coast the lower hills are composed of crystalline rocks, syenite and
granite, with, here and there, a strata of sandstone or limestone.
These are, undoubtedly, relics of the lower Cretaceous age, and we, or
rather, my brother, states that he has found them covered with marine
Tertiary deposits.

"Now this Mesozoic band varies greatly. Porphyritic tuffs and massive
limestone compose the western chain of the Andes above Lima, while in
the Oroya Valley we find carbonaceous sandstones. Some of the tuffs may
be of the Jurassic age, though the Cretaceous period is also largely
represented.

"Now while these different masses of rock formation offer hard enough
problems to the tunnel digger, still we are more or less prepared to
meet them, and we figured on a certain percentage of them. Up to the
present time we have met with just about what we expected, but what we
did not expect was something we came upon when the tunnel had been
driven three miles into the mountain."

"What did you find?" asked Tom, who knew enough about geology to
understand the terms used. Mr. Damon did not, however, and when Mr.
Titus rolled off some of the technical words, the drug investor softly
murmured such expressions as

"Bless my thermometer! Bless my porous plaster!"

"We found," resumed Mr. Titus, "after we had bored for a considerable
distance into the mountain, a mass of volcanic rock which is so hard
that our best diamond drills are dulled in a short time, and the
explosives we use merely shatter the face of the cutting, and give us
hardly any progress at all.

"It was after several trials, and when my brother found that he was
making scarcely any progress, compared to the energy of his men and the
blasting, that he wrote to me, explaining matters. I at once thought of
you, Tom Swift, and your powerful explosive, for I had read about it.

"Now then, will you sell us some of your powder--explosive or whatever
you call it--Mr. Swift, or tell us where we can get it? We need it
soon, for we are losing valuable time."

Mr. Titus paused to draw on a piece of paper a rough map of Peru, and
the district where the tunnel was being constructed. He showed where
the two railroad lines were, and where the new route would bring them
together, the tunnel eliminating a big grade up which it would have
been impossible to haul trains of any weight.

"What do you say, Mr. Swift?" the contractor concluded.  "Will you let
us have some of your powder? Or, better still, will you come to Peru
yourself? That would suit us immensely, for you could be right on the
ground. And you could carry out your plan of going with your friend
here," and Mr. Titus nodded toward Mr. Damon. "That is, if you were
thinking of going."

"Well, I was thinking of it," Tom admitted. "Mr. Damon and I have been
on so many trips together that it seems sort of natural for us to 'team
it.' I have never been to Peru, and I should like to see the country.
There is only one matter though, that bothers me."

"What is it?" asked Mr. Titus quickly. "If it is a question of money
dismiss it from your mind. The Peruvian government is paying a large
sum for this tunnel, and we stand to make considerable, even if we were
the lowest bidders. We can afford to pay you well--that is, we shall be
able to if we can complete the bore on time. That is what is bothering
me now--the unexpected strata of hard rock we have met with, which
seems impossible to blast. But I feel sure we can do it with the
explosive used in your giant cannon."

"That is just the point!" Tom exclaimed. "I am not so sure my explosive
would do."

"Why not?" the tunnel contractor asked. "It's powerful enough; isn't
it?"

"Yes, it is powerful enough, but whether it will have the right effect
on volcanic rock is hard to say. I should like to see a rock sample."

"I can telegraph to have some sent here to you," said Mr. Titus
eagerly. "Meantime, here is a description of it. I can read you that";
and, taking a letter from his pocket, he read to Tom a geological
description of the hard rock.

"Hum! Yes," mused Tom, as he listened. "It seems to be of the nature of
obsidian."

"Bless my watch chain!" cried Mr. Damon. "What's that?"

"Obsidian is a volcanic rock--a sort of combination of glass and flint
for hardness," Tom explained. "It is brittle, black in color, and the
natives of the Admiralty Islands use it for tipping their spears with
which they slay victims for their cannibalistic feasts."

"Bless my--bless my ear-drums!" gasped Mr. Damon.  "Cannibals!"

"Obsidian was also used by the ancient Mexicans to make knives and
daggers," Tom went on. "When Cortez conquered Mexico he found the
priests cutting the hearts from their living victims with knives made
from this volcanic glass-like rock, known as obsidian. It may be that
your brother has met with a vein of that in the tunnel," Tom said to
the contractor.

"Possibly," admitted Mr. Titus.

"In that case," Tom stated, "I may have to use a new kind of explosive.
That used for my giant cannon would merely crumble the hard rock for a
short distance."

"Then will you accept the contract, and help us out?" asked Mr. Titus
eagerly. "We will pay you well. Will you come to Peru and look over the
ground?"

"And kill two birds with one stone, and come with me also?" put in Mr.
Damon.

Tom pondered for a moment. He was about to answer when the tunnel
contractor, who was looking from the library window, suddenly jumped
from his chair crying:

"There he is again! Once more dogging me!"

As he rushed from the room, Tom and Mr. Damon had a glimpse of a face
at one of the low library windows--a face that had an evil look. It
disappeared as Mr. Titus ran from the room.




Chapter IV

Tom's Experiments


"Bless my looking glass, Tom, what does that mean?" exclaimed Mr.
Damon. "That face!"

"I don't know," answered the young inventor. "But the sight of some one
looking in here seemed to disturb Mr. Titus. We must follow him."

"Perhaps he saw your giant Koku looking in," suggested the odd, little
man who blessed everything he could think of.  "The sight of his face,
to any one not knowing him, Tom, would be enough to cause fright."

"It wasn't Koku who looked in the window," said Tom, decidedly. "It was
some stranger. Come on."

The young inventor and Mr. Damon hurried out after the tunnel
contractor, who was running down the road that led in front of the
Swift homestead.

"He's chasing some one, Tom," called Mr. Damon.

"Yes, I see he is. But who?"

"I can't see any one," reported Mr. Damon, who had run down to the
gate, at which his horse was still standing.  Mr. Damon had washed the
dirt from his hands and face, and was wearing one of Mr. Swift's coats
in place of his own split one.

Tom joined the eccentric man and together they looked down the road
after the running Mr. Titus. They were in half a mind to join him, when
they saw him pull up short, raise his hands as though he had given over
the pursuit, and turn back.

"I guess he got away, whoever he was," remarked Tom.  "We'll walk down
and meet Mr. Titus, and ask him what it all means."

Shortly afterward they came up to the contractor, who was breathing
heavily after his run, for he was evidently not used to such exercise.

"I beg your pardon, Tom Swift, for leaving you and Mr. Damon in such a
fashion," said Mr. Titus, "but I had to act quickly or lose the chance
of catching that rascal. As it was, he got away, but I think I gave him
a scare, and he knows that I saw him. It will make him more cautious in
the future."

"Who was it?" asked Tom.

"Well, I didn't have as close a look as I could have wished for," the
contractor said, as he walked back toward the house with Tom and Mr.
Damon, "but I'm pretty sure the face that peered in at us through the
library window was that of Isaac Waddington."

"And who is he, if it isn't asking information that ought not be given
out?" inquired Mr. Damon.

"Oh, no, certainly. I can tell you," said the contractor.  "Only
perhaps we had better wait until we get back to the house.

"Since one of their men was seen lurking around here there may be
others," went on Mr. Titus, when the three were once more seated in the
Swift library. "It is best to be on the safe side. The face I saw, I'm
sure, was that of Waddington, who is a tool of Blakeson & Grinder,
rival tunnel contractors. They put in a bid on this Andes tunnel, but
we were lower in our figures by several thousand dollars, and the
contract was awarded to us.

"Blakeson & Grinder tried, by every means in their power, to get the
job away from us. They even invoked the aid of some Peruvian
revolutionists and politicians, but we held our ground and began the
work. Since then they have had spies and emissaries on our trail,
trying their best to make us fail in our work, so the Peruvian
officials might abrogate the contract and give it to them.

"But, so far, we've managed to come out ahead. This Waddington is a
sort of spy, and I've found him dodging me several times of late. I
suppose he wants to find out my plans so as to be ready to jump in the
breach in case we fail."

"Do you think your rivals had anything to do with the difficulties you
are now meeting with in digging the tunnel?" asked Mr. Damon. Mr. Titus
shook his head.

"The present difficulties are all of Nature's doing," he said. "It's
just the abnormally hard rock that is bothering us. Only for that we'd
be all right, though we might have petty difficulties because of the
mean acts of Blakeson & Grinder. But I don't fear them."

"How do you think this Waddington, if it was he, knew you were coming
here?" asked Tom.

"I can only guess. My brother and I have had some correspondence
regarding you, Tom Swift. That is, I announced my intention of coming
to see you, and my brother wrote me to use my discretion. I wrote back
that I would consult you.

"Our main office is in New York, where we employ a large clerical and
expert force. There is nothing to prevent one of our stenographers, for
instance, turning traitor and giving copies of the letters of my
brother and myself to our rivals.

"Mind you, I don't say this was done, and I don't suspect any of our
employees, but it would be an easy matter for any one to know my plans.
I never thought of making a secret of them, or of my trip here. In some
way Waddington found out about the last, and he must have followed me
here. Then he sneaked up under the window, and tried to hear what we
said."

"Do you think he did?" asked Tom.

"I wouldn't be surprised. We took no pains to lower our voices. But,
after all, he hasn't learned much that he didn't know before, if he
knew I was coming here. He didn't learn the secret of the explosive
that must be used, and that is the vital thing. For I defy him, or any
other contractor, to blast that hard rock with any known explosive.
We've tried every kind on the market and we've failed. We'll have to
depend on you, Tom Swift, to help us out with some of your giant cannon
powder."

"And I'm not sure that will work," said the young inventor. "I think
I'll have to experiment and make a new explosive, if I conclude to go
to Peru."

"Oh, you'll go all right!" declared Mr. Titus with a smile. "I can see
that you are eager for the adventures I am sure you'll find there, and,
besides, your friend here, Mr. Damon, needs you."

"That's what I do, Tom!" exclaimed the odd man. "Bless my excursion
ticket, but you must come!"

"I'll have to invent the new powder first," Tom said.

"That's what I like to hear!" exclaimed Mr. Titus. "It shows you are
thinking of coming with us."

Tom only smiled.

"I am so anxious to get the proper explosive," went on Mr. Titus, "that
I would even purchase it from our rivals, Blakeson & Grinder, if I
thought they had it. But I'm sure they have not, though they may think
they can get it.

"That may be the reason they are following me so closely.  They may
want to know just when we will fail, and have to give up the contract,
and they may think they can step in and finish the work. But I don't
believe, without your help, Tom Swift, that they can blast that hard
rock, and--"

"Well, I'll say this," interrupted Tom, "first come, first served with
me, other things being equal. You have applied to me and, like a
lawyer, I won't go over to the other side now. I consider myself
retained by your firm, Mr. Titus, to invent some sort of explosive, and
if I am successful I shall expect to be paid."

"Oh, of course!" cried the contractor eagerly.

"Very good," Tom went on. "You needn't fear that I'll help the other
fellows. Now to get down to business. I must see some samples of this
rock in order to know what kind of explosive force is needed to rend
it."

"I have some in New York," went on the contractor. "I'll have it sent
to you at once. I would have brought it, only it is too heavy to carry
easily, and I was not sure I could engage you."

"Did that fellow--Waddington, I believe you called him--get away from
you?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Clean away," the contractor answered. "He was a better runner than I."

"It doesn't matter much," Tom said. "He didn't hear anything that would
benefit him, and I'll give my men orders to be on the lookout for him.
What sort of fellow is he, Mr. Titus?"

The contractor described the eavesdropper, and Mr. Damon exclaimed:

"Bless my turkey wish-bone! I'm sure I passed that chap when I was
riding over to see you a while ago, Tom."

"You did?"

"Yes, on the highway. He inquired the way to your place.  But there was
nothing strange in that, since you employ a number of men, and I
thought this one was coming to look for work. I can't say I liked his
appearance, though."

"No, he isn't a very prepossessing individual," commented Mr. Titus.
"Well, now what's the first thing to be done, Tom Swift?"

"Get me some samples of the rock, so I can begin my experiments."

"I'll do that. And now let us consider about going to Peru. For I'm
sure you will be successful in your experiments, and will find for us
just the powder or explosive we need."

"We can go together." said Mr. Damon. "I shall certainly feel more at
home in that wild country if I know Tom Swift is with me, and I will
appreciate the help of you and your friends, Mr. Titus, in
straightening out the tangles of our drug business."

"I'll do all I can for you, Mr. Damon."

The three then talked at some length regarding possible plans. Tom sent
out word to one of his men to keep a sharp watch around the house and
grounds, against the possible return of Waddington, but nothing more
was seen of him, at least for the time being.

Mr. Titus drew up a sort of tentative agreement with Tom, binding his
firm to pay a large sum in case the young inventor was successful, and
then the contractor left, promising to have the rock samples come on
later by express.

Mr. Damon, after blessing a few dozen more or less impersonal objects,
took his departure, his fractious horse having quieted down in the
meanwhile, and Tom was left to himself.

"I wonder what I've let myself in for now," the youth mused, as he went
back to his laboratory. "It's a new field for me--tunnel blasting.
Well, perhaps something may come of it."

But of the strange adventure that was to follow his agreement to help
Mr. Titus, our hero, Tom Swift, had not the least inkling.

Tom went back to his labors over the gyroscope problem, but he could
arrive at no satisfactory conclusion, and, tossing aside the papers,
covered with intricate figures, he exclaimed:

"Oh, I'm going for a walk! This thing is getting on my nerves."

He strolled through the Shopton streets, and as he reached the
outskirts of the town, he saw just ahead of him the figure of a girl.
Tom quickened his pace, and presently was beside her.

"Where are you going, Mary?" he asked.

"Oh, Tom! How you startled me!" she exclaimed, turning around. "I was
just thinking of you."

"Thanks! Something nice?"

"I shan't tell you!" and she blushed. "But where are you going?"

"Walking with you!"

Tom was nothing if not bold.

"Hadn't you better wait until you're asked?" she retorted,
mischievously.

"If I did I might not get an invitation. So I'm going to invite myself,
and then I'm going to invite you in here to have an ice cream soda,"
and he and Miss Nestor were soon seated at a table in a candy shop.

Tom had nearly finished his ice cream when he glanced toward the door,
and started at the sight of a man who was entering the place.

"What's the matter?" asked Mary. "Did you drop some ice cream, Tom?"

"No, Mary. But that man--"

Mary turned in time to see an excited man hurry out of the candy shop
after a hasty glance at Tom Swift.

"Who was he?" the girl asked.

"I--er--oh, some one I thought I knew, but I guess I don't," said Tom,
quickly. "Have some more cream, Mary?"

"No, thank you. Not now."

Tom was glad she did not care for any, as he was anxious to get
outside, and have a look at the man, for he thought he had recognized
the face as the same that had peered in his window. But when he and
Miss Nestor reached the front of the shop the strange man was not in
sight.

"I guess he came in to cool off after his run," mused Tom, "but when he
saw me he didn't care about it. I wonder if that was Waddington? He's a
persistent individual if it was he."

"Are you undertaking any new adventures, Tom?" asked Mary.

"Well, I'm thinking of going to Peru."

"Peru!" she cried. "Oh, what a long way to go! And when you get there
will you write to me? I'm collecting stamps, and I haven't any from
Peru."

"Is that--er--the only reason you want me to write?" asked Tom.

"No," said Mary softly, as she ran up the walk.

Tom smiled as he turned away.

Three days later he received a box from New York. It contained the
samples from the Andes tunnel, and Tom at once began his experiments to
discover a suitable explosive for rending the hard stone.

"It is compressed molten lava," said Mr. Swift. "You'll never get an
explosive that will successfully blast that, Tom."

"We'll see," declared the young inventor.




Chapter V

Mary's Present


Outside a rudely-constructed shack, in the middle of a large field,
about a mile away from the nearest of the buildings owned by Tom Swift
and his father, were gathered a group of figures one morning. From the
shack, trailing over the ground, were two insulated wires, which led to
a pile of rocks and earth some distance off. Out of the temporary
building came Koku, the giant, bearing in his arms a big rock, of
peculiar formation.

"That's it, Koku!" exclaimed Tom Swift. "Now don't drop it on your
toes."

"No, Master, me no drop," the giant said, as he strode off with the
heavy load as easily as a boy might carry a stone for his sling-shot.

Koku placed the big rock on top of the pile of dirt and stones and came
back to the hut, just as Eradicate, the colored man-of-all-work,
emerged. Koku was not looking ahead, and ran into Eradicate with such
force that the latter would have fallen had not the giant clasped his
big arms about him.

"Heah now!  Whut yo' all doin' t' me?" angrily demanded Eradicate. "Yo'
done gone an' knocked de breff outen me, dat's whut yo' all done! I'll
bash yo' wif a rock, dat's what I'll do!"

Koku, laughing, tried to explain that it was all an accident, but
Eradicate would not listen. He looked about for a stone to throw at the
giant, though it was doubtful, with his feeble strength, and
considering the great frame of the big man, if any damage would have
been done. But Eradicate saw no rocks nearer than the pile in which
ended the two insulated wires, and, with mutterings, the negro set off
in that direction, shuffling along on his rheumatic legs.

From the shack Tom Swift hailed:

"Hi there, Rad! Come back! Where are you going?"

"I'se gwine t' git a rock, Massa Tom, an' bash de haid ob dat big
lummox ob a giant! He done knocked de breff outen me, so he did."

"You come back from that stone pile!" Tom ordered. "I'm going to blow
it up in a minute, and if you get too near you'll have the breath
knocked out of you worse than Koku did it. Come back, I say!"

But Eradicate was obstinate and kept on. Tom, who was adjusting a
firing battery in the shack, laughed, and then in exasperation cried:

"Koku, go and get him and bring him back. Carry him if he won't come
any other way. I don't want the dear old chump to get the fright of his
life, and he sure will if he goes too close. Bring him back!"

"Koku bring, Master," was the giant's answer.

He ran toward Eradicate, who, seeing his tormentor approaching,
redoubled his shuffling pace toward the stone pile. But he was no match
for the giant, who, ignoring his struggles, picked up Eradicate, and,
flinging him over his shoulder like a sack of meal, brought him to the
shack.

"There him be, Master!" said the giant.

"So I see," laughed Tom. "Now you stay here, Rad."

"No, sah!  No, sah, Massa Tom! I--I'se gwine t' git a rock an'--an'
bash his haid--dat's what I'se gwine t' do!" and the colored man tried
to struggle to his feet.

"Look out now!" cried Tom, suddenly. "If things go right there won't be
a rock left for you to 'bash' anybody's head with, Rad. Look out!"

The three cowered inside the shack, which, though it was rudely made,
was built of heavy logs and planks, with a fronting of sod and bags of
sand.

Tom turned a switch. There was a loud report, and where the stone pile
had been there was a big hole in the ground, while the air was filled
with fragments of rock and dirt.  These came down in a shower on the
roof of the shack, and Eradicate covered his ears with his trembling
hands.

"Am--am de world comin' to de end, Massa Tom?" he asked.  "Am dat
Gabriel's trump I done heah?"

"No, you dear old goose!" laughed the young inventor.  "That was just a
charge of my new explosive--a small charge, too. But it seems to have
done the work."

He ran from the shack to the place where the rock pile had been, and
picked up several small fragments.

"Busted all to pieces!" exulted Tom Swift. "Not a piece left as big as
a hickory nut. That's going some! I've got the right mixture at last.
If an ounce did that, a few hundred pounds ought to knock that Andes
tunnel through the mountain in no time. I'll telegraph to Mr. Titus."

Leaving Koku and Rad to collect the wires and firing apparatus, there
being no danger now, as no explosive was left in the shack, Tom made
his way back to the house. His father met him.

"Well, Tom," he asked, "another failure?"

"No, Dad! Success! This time I turned the trick. I seem to have gotten
just the right mixture. Look, these are some of the pieces left from
the big rock--one of the samples Mr. Titus sent me. It was all cracked
up as small as this," and he held out the fragments he had picked up in
the field.

Mr. Swift regarded them for a few moments.

"That's better, Tom," he said. "I didn't think you could get an
explosive that would successfully shatter that hard rock, but you seem
to have done it. Have you the formula all worked out?"

"All worked out, Dad. I only made a small quantity, but the same
proportions will hold good for the larger amounts.  I'm going to start
in and make it now. And then--Ho! for Peru!"

Tom struck an attitude, such as some old discoverer might have assumed,
and then he hurried into the house to telephone a telegram to the
Shopton office. The message was to Mr. Titus, and read:


"Explosive success. Start making it at once. Ready for Peru in month's
time."


"Thirteen words," repeated Tom, as the operator called them back to
him. "I hope that doesn't mean bad luck."

The experiment which Tom Swift had just brought to a successful
conclusion was one of many he had conducted, extending over several
wearying weeks.

As soon as Tom had received the samples of the rock he had begun to
experiment. First he tried some of the explosive that was so successful
in the giant cannon. As he had feared, it was not what was needed. It
cracked the rock, but did not disintegrate it, and that was what was
needed.  The hard rock must be broken up into fragments that could be
easily handled. Merely to crack it necessitated further explosions,
which would only serve to split it more and perhaps wedge it fast in
the tunnel.

So Tom tried different mixtures, using various chemicals, but none
seemed to be just right. The trials were not without danger, either.
Once, in mixing some ingredients, there was an explosion that injured
one man, and blew Tom some distance away. Fortunately for him, there
was an open window in the direction in which he was propelled, and he
went through that, escaping with only some cuts and bruises.

Another time there was a hang-fire, and the explosive burned instead of
detonating, so that one of the shops caught, and there was no little
work in subduing the flames.

But Tom would not give up, and finally, after many trials, he hit on
what he felt to be the right mixture. This he took out to the big lot,
and having made a miniature tunnel with some of the sample rock, and
having put some of the explosive in a hole bored in the big chunk Koku
carried, Tom fired the charge. The result we have seen. It was a
success.

A day after receiving Tom's message Mr. Titus came on and a
demonstration was given of the powerful explosive.

"Tom, that's great!" cried the tunnel contractor. "Our troubles are at
an end now."

But, had he known it, new ones were only just beginning.

Tom at once began preparations for making the explosive on a large
scale, as much of it would be needed in the Andes tunnel. Then, having
turned the manufacturing end of it over to his men, Tom began his
preparations for going to Peru.

Mr. Damon was also getting ready, and it was arranged that he, with Tom
and Mr. Titus, should take a vessel from San Francisco, crossing the
continent by train. The supply of explosive would follow them by
special freight.

"We might have gone by Panama except for the slide in the canal," Tom
said. "And I suppose I could take you across the continent in my
airship, Mr. Titus, if you object to railroad travel."

"No, thank you, Tom. If it's just the same to you, I'd rather stay on
the ground," the contractor said. "I'm more used to it."

A day or so before the start for San Francisco was to be made, Tom,
passing a store in Shopton, saw something in the window he thought Mary
Nestor would like. It was a mahogany work-box, of unique design,
beautifully decorated, and Tom purchased it.

"Shall I have it sent?" asked the clerk.

"No, thank you," Tom answered.

He knew the young lady who had waited on him, and, for reasons of his
own, he did not want her to know that Mary was to get the box.

Carrying the present to his laboratory, Tom prepared to wrap it up
suitably to send to Mary, with a note. Just, however, as he was looking
for a box suitable to contain the gift, he received a summons to the
telephone. Mr. Titus, in New York, wanted to speak to him.

"Here, Rad!" Tom called. "Just box this up for me, like a good fellow,
and then take it to Miss Nestor at this address; will you?" and Tom
handed his man the addressed letter he had written to Mary. "Be careful
of it," Tom cautioned.

"Oh, I'll be careful, Massa Tom," was the reply. "I'll shore be
careful."

And Eradicate was--all too careful.




Chapter VI

Mr. Nestor's Letter


"Got t' git a good strong box fo' dish yeah," murmured Eradicate, as he
looked at the beautiful mahogany present Tom had turned over to him to
take to Mary. "Mah Landy! Dat suttinly am nice; Ah! Um! Jest laik some
ob de old mahogany furniture dat was in our fambily down Souf."
Eradicate did not mean his family, exactly, but the one in which he had
been a slave.

"Yassum, dat shore am nice!" he went on, talking to himself as he
admired the present. "I shore got t' put dat in a good box! An' dish
year note, too. Let's see what it done say on de outside."

Eradicate held the envelope carefully upside down, and read--or rather
pretended to read--the name and address.  Eradicate knew well enough
where Mary lived, for this was not the first time he had gone there
with messages from his young master.

"Massa Tom shore am a fine writer," mused the negro, as he slowly
turned the envelope around. "I cain't read nobody's writin' but hisen,
nohow."

Had Eradicate been strictly honest with himself, he would have
confessed that he could not read any writing, or printing either. His
education had been very limited, but one could show him, say, a printed
sign and tell him it read "Danger" or "Five miles to Branchville," or
anything like that, and the next time he saw it, Eradicate would know
what that sign said. He seemed to fix a picture of it in his mind,
though the letters and figures by themselves meant nothing to him. So
when Tom told him the envelope contained the name and address of Miss
Nestor, Eradicate needed nothing more.

He rummaged about in some odds and ends in the corner of the
laboratory, and brought out a strong, wooden box, which had a cover
that screwed down.

"Dat'll be de ticket!" Eradicate exclaimed. "De mahogany present will
jest fit." Eradicate took some excelsior to pad the box, and then,
dropping inside it the gift, already wrapped in tissue paper, he
proceeded to screw on the cover.

There was something printed in red letters on the outside box, but
Eradicate could not read, so it did not trouble him.

"Dat Miss Nestor shore will laik her present," he murmured. "An' I'll
be mighty keerful ob it' laik Massa Tom tole me. He wouldn't trust dat
big lummox Koku wif anyt'ing laik dis."

Screwing on the cover, and putting a piece of wrapping paper outside
the rough, wooden box, with the letter in his hand, Eradicate, full of
his own importance, set off for Miss Nestor's house. Tom had not
returned from the telephone, over which he was talking to Mr. Titus.

The message was an important one. The contractor said he had received
word from his brother in Peru that his presence was urgently needed
there.

"Could you arrange to get off sooner than we planned, Tom?" asked Mr.
Titus. "I am afraid something has happened down there. Have you sent
the first shipment of explosive?"

"Yes, that went three days ago. It ought to arrive at Lima soon after
we do. Why yes, I can start to-night if we have to. I'll find out if
Mr. Damon can be with us on such short notice."

"I wish you would," came from Mr. Titus. "And say, Tom, do you think
you could take that giant Koku with you?"

"Why?"

"Well, I think he'd come in handy. There are some pretty rough
characters in those Andes Mountains, and your big friend might be
useful."

"All right. I was thinking of it, anyhow. Glad you mentioned it. Now
I'll call up Mr. Damon, and I'll let you know, in an hour or so, if he
can make it."

"Bless my hair brush, yes, Tom!" exclaimed the eccentric man, when told
of the change in plans. "I can leave to-night as well as not."

Word to this effect was sent on to Mr. Titus, and then began some
hurrying on the part of Tom Swift. He told Koku to get ready to leave
for New York at once, where he and the giant would join Mr. Titus and
Mr. Damon, and start across the continent to take for steamer for Lima,
Peru.

"Rad, did you send that present to Miss Nestor?" asked Tom, later, as
he finished packing his grip.

"Yas, sah. I done did it. Took it mase'f!"

"That's good! I guess I'll have to say good-bye to Mary over the
telephone. I won't have time to call. I'm glad I thought of the
present."

Tom got the Nestor house on the wire. But Mary was not in.

"There's a package here for her," said the girl's mother. "Did you--?"

"Yes, I sent that," Tom said. "Sorry I won't be able to call and say
good-bye, but I'm in a terrible rush. I'll see her as soon as I get
back, and I'll write as soon as I arrive."

"Do," urged Mrs. Nestor. "We'll all be glad to hear from you," for Tom
and Mary were tentatively engaged to be married.

Tom and Koku went on with their hurried preparations to leave for New
York. Eradicate begged to be taken along, but Tom gently told the
faithful old servant that it was out of the question.

"Besides, Rad," he said, "it's dangerous in those Andes Mountains. Why,
they have birds there, as big as cows, and they can swoop down and
carry off a man your size."

"Am dat shorely so, Massa Tom?"

"Of course it is! You get the dictionary and read about the condors of
the Andes Mountains."

"Dat's what I'll do, Massa Tom. Birds as big as cows what kin pick up a
man in dere beaks, an' carry him off! Oh, my!  No, sah, Massa Tom! I
don't want t' go. I'll stay right yeah!"

Shortly before Tom and Koku departed for the railroad station, where
they were to take a train for New York, Mary Nestor returned home.

"Tom called you on the telephone to say good-bye," her mother informed
her, "and said he was sorry he could not see you. But he sent some sort
of gift."

"Oh, how sweet of him!" Mary exclaimed. "Where is it?"

"On the dining room table. Eradicate brought it with a note."

Mary read the note first.

In it Tom begged Mary to accept the little token, and to think of him
when she used it.

"Oh! I wonder what it can be," she cried in delight.

"Better open it and see," advised Mr. Nestor, who had come in at that
moment.

Mary cut the string of the outside paper, and folded back the wrapper.
A wooden box was exposed to view, a solid, oblong, wooden box, and on
the top, in bold, red letters Mary, her father and her mother read:

DYNAMITE! HANDLE WITH CARE!


"Oh! Oh!" murmured Mrs. Nestor.

"Dynamite! Handle with care!" repeated Mr. Nestor, in a sort of dazed
voice. "Quick! Get a pail of water! Dump it in the bathtub!  Soak it
good, and then telephone for the police. Dynamite! What does this mean?"

He rushed toward the kitchen, evidently with the intention of getting a
pail of water, but Mary clasped him by the arm.

"Father!" she exclaimed. "Don't get so excited!"

"Excited!" he cried. "Who's excited? Dynamite! We'll all be blown up!
This is some plot! I don't believe Tom sent this at all! Look out! Call
the police! Excited! Who's getting excited?"

"You are, Daddy dear!" said Mary calmly. "This is some mistake. Tom did
send this--I know his writing. And wasn't it Eradicate who brought this
package, Mother?"

"Yes, my dear. But your father is right. Let him put it in water, then
it will be safe. Oh, we'll all be blown up. Get the water!"

"No!" cried Mary. "There is some mistake. Tom wouldn't send me
dynamite. There must be a present for me in there.  Tom must have put
it in the wrong box by mistake. I'm going to open it."

Mary's calmness had its effect on her parents. Mr. Nestor cooled down,
as did his wife, and a closer examination of the outer box did not seem
to show that it was an infernal machine of any kind.

"It's all a mistake, Daddy," Mary said. "I'll show you.  Get me a screw
driver."

After some delay one was found, and Mr. Nestor himself opened the box.
When the tissue paper wrappings of the mahogany gift were revealed he
gave a sigh of relief, and when Mary undid the wrappings, and saw what
Tom had sent her, she cried:

"Oh, how perfectly dear! Just what I wanted! I wonder how he knew? Oh,
I just love it!" and she hugged the beautiful box in her arms.

"Humph!" exclaimed Mr. Nestor, a slowly gathering light of anger
showing in his eyes. "It is a nice present, but that is a very poor
sort of joke to play, in my estimation."

"Joke! What joke?" asked Mary.

"Putting a present in a box labeled Dynamite, and giving us such a
scare," went on her father.

"Oh, Father, I'm sure he didn't mean to do it!" Mary said, earnestly.

"Well, maybe he didn't! He may have thought it a joke, and he may not
have! But, at any rate, it was a piece of gross carelessness on his
part, and I don't care to consider for a son-in-law a young man as
careless as that!"

"Oh, Daddy!" expostulated Mary.

"Now, now! Tut, tut!" exclaimed Mr. Nestor. "It isn't your fault, Mary,
but this Tom Swift must be taught a lesson. He was careless, if nothing
worse, and, for all he knew, there might have been some stray bits of
dynamite in that packing box. It won't do! It won't do! I'll write him
a letter, and give him a piece of my mind!"

And in spite of all his wife and his daughter could say, Mr. Nestor did
write Tom a scathing letter. He accused him of either perpetrating a
joke, or of being careless, or both, and he intimated that the less he
saw of Tom at the Nestor home hereafter the better pleased he would be.

"There! I guess that will make him wish he hadn't done it!" exclaimed
Mr. Nestor, as he called a messenger and sent the letter to Tom's house.

Mary and her mother did not know the contents of the note, but Mary
tried to get Tom on the wire and explain.  However, she was unable to
reach him, as Tom was on the point of leaving.

The messenger, with Mr. Nestor's letter, arrived just as our hero was
receiving the late afternoon mail from the postman, and just as Tom and
Koku were getting in an automobile to leave for the depot.

"Good-bye, Dad!" Tom called. "Good-bye, Mrs. Baggert!" He thrust Mr.
Nestor's letter, unopened, together with some other mail matter, which
he took to be merely circulars, into an inner pocket, and jumped into
the car.

Tom and Koku were off on the first stage of their journey.




Chapter VII

Off for Peru


"Well, Tom Swift, you're on time I see," was Mr. Job Titus' greeting,
when our hero, and Koku, the giant, alighted from a taxicab in New
York, in front of the hotel the contractor had appointed as a meeting
place.

"Yes, I'm here."

"Did you have a good trip?"

"Oh, all right, yes. Nothing happened to speak of, though we were
delayed by a freight wreck. Has Mr. Damon got here yet?"

"Not yet, Tom. But I had a message saying he was on his way. Come on up
to the rooms I have engaged. Hello, what's all the crowd here for?"
asked the contractor in some surprise, for a throng had gathered at the
hotel entrance.

"I expect it's Koku they're staring at," announced Tom, and the giant
it was who had attracted the attention. He was carrying his own big
valise, and a small steamer trunk belonging to Tom, as easily as though
they weighed nothing, the trunk being under one arm.

"I guess they don't see men of his size outside of circuses," commented
the contractor. "We can pretty nearly, though not quite match him, down
in Peru though, Tom. Some of the Indians are big fellows."

"We'll get up a wrestling match between one of them and Koku,"
suggested Tom. "Come on!" he called to the giant, who was surrounded by
a crowd.

Koku pushed his way through as easily as a bull might make his way
through a throng of puppies about his heels, and as Tom, Mr. Titus and
the giant were entering the hotel corridor, the chauffeur of the
taxicab called out with a laugh:

"I say, boss, don't you think you ought to pay double rates on that
chap," and he nodded in the direction of the giant.

"That's right!" added some one in the crowd with a laugh.  "He might
have broken the springs."

"All right," assented Tom, good-naturedly, tossing the chauffeur a
coin. "Here you are, have a cigar on the giant."

There was more laughter, and even Koku grinned, though it is doubtful
if he knew what about, for he could not understand much unless Tom
spoke to him in a sort of code they had arranged between them.

"Sorry to have hastened your departure," began Mr. Titus when he and
Tom sat in the comfortable hotel rooms, while Koku stood at a window,
looking out at what to him were the marvelous wonders of the New York
streets.

"It didn't make any difference," replied the young inventor. "I was
about ready to come anyhow. I just had to hustle a little," and he
thought of how he had had to send Mary's present to her instead of
taking it himself. As yet he was all unaware of the commotion it had
caused.

"Did you get the powder shipment off all right?"

"Yes, and it will be there almost as soon as we. Other shipments will
follow as we need them. My father will see to that."

"I'm glad you hit on the right kind of powder," went on the contractor.
"I guess I didn't make any mistake in coming to you, Tom."

"Well, I hope not. Of course the explosive worked all right in
experimental charges with samples of the tunnel rock. It remains to be
seen what it will do under actual conditions, and in big service
charges."

"Oh, I've no doubt it will work all right."

"What time do we leave here?" Tom asked.

"At two-thirty this afternoon. We have just time to get a good dinner
and have our baggage transferred to the Chicago limited. In less than a
week we ought to be in San Francisco and aboard the steamer. I hope Mr.
Damon arrives on time."

"Oh, you can generally depend on him," said Tom. "I telephoned him,
just before I started from Shopton, and he said--"

"Bless my carpet slippers!" cried a voice outside the hotel apartment.
"But I can find my way all right. I know the number of the room. No!
you needn't take my bag. I can carry it my self!"

"There he is!" laughed Tom, opening the door to disclose the eccentric
gentleman himself, struggling to keep possession of his valise against
the importunities of a bellboy.

"Ah, Tom--Mr. Titus! Glad to see you!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "I--I am a
little late, I fear--had an accident--wait until I get my breath," and
he sank, panting, into a chair.

"Accident?" cried Tom. "Are you--?"

"Yes--my taxicab ran into another. Nobody hurt though."

"But you're all out of breath," said Mr. Titus. "Did you run?"

"No, but I walked upstairs."

"What! Seven flights?" exclaimed Tom. "Weren't the hotel elevators
running?"

"Yes, but I don't like them. I'd rather walk. And I did--carried my
valise--bellboy tried to take it away from me every step--here you are,
son--it wasn't the tip I was trying to get out of," and he tossed the
waiting and grinning lad a quarter.

"There, I'm better now," went on Mr. Damon, when Tom had given him a
glass of water. "Bless my paper weight! The drug concern will have to
vote me an extra dividend for what I've gone through. Well, I'm here,
anyhow. How is everything?"

"Fine!" cried Tom. "We'll soon be off for Peru!"

They talked over plans and made sure nothing had been forgotten. Their
railroad tickets had been secured by Mr. Titus so there was nothing
more to do save wait for train-time.

"I've never been to Peru," Tom remarked shortly before lunch. "What
sort of country is it?"

"Quite a wonderful country," Mr. Titus answered. "I have been very much
interested in it since my brother and I accepted this tunnel contract.
Peru seems to have taken its name from Peru, a small river on the west
coast of Colombia, where Pizarro landed. The country, geographically,
may be divided into three sections longitudinally. The coast region is
a sandy desert, with here and there rivers flowing through fertile
valleys. The sierra region is the Andes division, about two hundred and
fifty miles in width."

"Is that where we're going?" asked Tom.

"Yes. And beyond the Andes (which in Peru consist of great chains of
mountains, some very high, interspersed with table lands, rich plains
and valleys) there is the montana region of tropical forests, running
down to the valley of the Amazon.

"That sounds interesting," commented Mr. Damon.

"It is interesting," declared Mr. Titus. "For it is from this tropical
region that your quinine comes, Mr. Damon, though you may not have to
go there to straighten out your affairs. I think you can do better
bargaining with the officials in Lima, or near there."

"Are there any wild animals in Peru?" Tom inquired.

"Well, not many. Of course there are the llamas and alpacas, which are
the beasts of burden--almost like little camels you might say, though
much more gentle. Then there is the wild vicuna, the fleece of which is
made into a sort of wool, after which a certain kind of cloth is named.

"Then there is the taruco, a kind of deer, the viscacha, which is a big
rat, the otoc, a sort of wild dog, or fox, and the ucumari, a black
bear with a white nose. This bear is often found on lofty mountain
tops, but only when driven there in search of food.

"The condors, of course, are big birds of prey in the Andes. You must
have read about them; how they seem to lie in the upper regions of the
air, motionless, until suddenly they catch sight of some dead animal
far down below when they sweep toward it with the swiftness of the
wink. There is another bird of the vulture variety, with wings of black
and white feathers. The ancient Incas used to decorate their head
dresses with these wing feathers."

"Well, I'm glad I'm going to Peru," said Tom. "I never knew it was such
an interesting country. But I don't suppose we'll have time to see much
of it."

"Oh, I think you will," commented Mr. Titus. "We don't always have to
work on the tunnel. There are numerous holidays, or holy-days, which
our Indian workers take off, and we can do nothing without them. I'll
see that you have a chance to do some exploring if you wish."

"Good!" exclaimed Tom. "I brought my electric rifle with me, and I may
get a chance to pop over one of those bears with a white nose. Are they
good to eat?"

"The Indians eat them, I believe, when they can get them, but I
wouldn't fancy the meat," said the contractor.

Luncheon over, the three travelers departed with their baggage for the
Chicago Limited, which left from the Pennsylvania Station at
Twenty-third Street. As usual, Koku attracted much attention because of
his size.

The trip to San Francisco was without incident worth narrating and in
due time our friends reached the Golden Gate where they were to go
aboard their steamer. They had to wait a day, during which time Tom and
Mr. Titus made inquiries regarding the first powder shipment. They had
had unexpected good luck, for the explosive, having been sent on ahead
by fast freight, was awaiting them.

"So we can take it with us on the Bellaconda," said, Tom, naming the
vessel on which they were to sail.

The powder was safely stowed away, and our friends having brought their
baggage aboard, putting what was wanted on the voyage in their
staterooms, went out on deck to watch the lines being cast off.

A bell clanged and an officer cried:

"All ashore that's going ashore!"

There were hasty good-byes, a scramble on the part of those who had
come to bid friends farewell, and preparations were made to haul in the
gangplank.

Just as the tugs were slowly pushing against the Bellaconda to get her
in motion to move her away from the wharf, there was a shout down the
pier and a taxicab, driven at reckless speed, dashed up.

"Wait a minute! Hold that gangway. I have a passenger for you!" cried
the chauffeur.

He pulled up with a screeching of brakes, and a man with a heavy black
beard fairly leaped from the vehicle, running toward the plank which
was all but cast off.

"My fare! My fare!" yelled the taxicab driver.

"Take it out of that! Keep the change!" cried the bearded man over his
shoulder, tossing a crumpled bill to the chauffeur. And then, clutching
his valise in a firm hand, the belated passenger rushed up the
gangplank just in time to board the steamer which was moving away from
the dock.

"Close shave--that," observed Tom.

"That's right," assented Mr. Titus.

"Well, we're off for Peru!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, as the vessel moved
down the bay.




Chapter VIII

The Bearded Man


Travel to Tom and Mr. Damon presented no novelties. They had been on
too many voyages over the sea, under the sea and even in the air above
the sea to find anything unusual in merely taking a trip on a steamer.

Mr. Titus, though he admitted he had never been in a submarine or
airship, had done considerable traveling about the world in his time,
and had visited many countries, either for business or pleasure, so he
was an old hand at it.

But to Koku, who, since he had been brought from the land where Tom
Swift had been made captive, had gone about but little, everything was
novel, and he did not know at what to look first.

The giant was interested in the ship, in the water, in the passengers,
in the crew and in the sights to be seen as they progressed down the
harbor.

And the big man himself was a source of wonder to all save his own
party. Everywhere he went about the decks, or below, he was followed by
a staring but respectful crowd.  Koku took it all good-naturedly,
however, and even consented to show his great strength by lifting heavy
weights. Once when several sailors were shifting one of the smaller
anchors (a sufficiently heavy one for all that) Koku pushed them aside
with a sweep of his big arm, and, picking up the big "hook," turned to
the second mate and asked:

"Where you want him?"

"Good land, man!" cried the astonished officer. "You'll kill yourself!"

But Koku carried the anchor where it ought to go, and from then on he
was looked up to with awe and admiration by the sailors.

From San Francisco to Callao, Peru (the latter city being the seaport
of Lima, which is situated inland), is approximately nine hundred
miles. But as the Bellaconda was a coasting steamer, and would make
several stops on her trip, it would be more than a week before our
friends would land at Callao, then to proceed to Lima, where they
expected to remain a day or so before striking into the interior to
where the tunnel was being bored through the mountain.

The first day was spent in getting settled, becoming used to their new
surroundings, finding their places and neighbors at table, and in
making acquaintances. There were some interesting men and women aboard
the Bellaconda, and Tom Swift, Mr. Damon and Mr. Titus soon made
friends with them. This usually came about through the medium of Koku,
the giant. Persons seeing him would inquire about him, and when they
learned he was Tom Swift's helper it was an easy topic with which to
open conversation.

Tom told, modestly enough, how he had come to get Koku in his escape
from captivity, but Mr. Damon was not so simple in describing Tom's
feats, so that before many days had passed our hero found himself
regarded as a personage of considerable importance, which was not at
all to his liking.

"But bless my fountain pen!" cried Mr. Damon, when Tom objected to so
much notoriety. "You did it all; didn't you?"

"Yes, I know. But these people won't believe it."

"Oh, yes they will!" said the odd man. "I'll take good care that they
believe it."

"If any one say it not so, you tell me!" broke Koku, shaking his huge
fist.

"No, I guess I'd better keep still," said Tom, with a laugh.

The weather was pleasant, if we except a shower or two, and as the
vessel proceeded south, tropical clothing became the order of the day,
while all who could, spent most of their time on deck under the shade
of awnings.

"Did you ever hear anything more of that fellow, Waddington?" asked Tom
of Mr. Titus one day.

"Not a thing. He seems to have dropped out of sight."

"And are your rivals, Blakeson & Grinder, making any trouble?"

"Not that I've heard of. Though just what the situation may be down in
Peru I don't know. I fancy everything isn't going just right or my
brother would not be so anxious for me to come on in such a hurry."

"Do you anticipate any real trouble?"

Mr. Titus paused a moment before answering.

"Well, yes," he said, finally, "I do!"

"What sort?" asked Tom.

"That I can't say. I'll be perfectly frank with you, Tom.  You know I
told you at the time that we were in for difficulties. I didn't want
you to go into this thing blindly."

"Oh, I'm not afraid of trouble," Tom hastened to assure his friend.
"I've had more or less of it in my life, and I'm willing to meet it
again. Only I like to know what kind it is."

"Well, I can't tell you--exactly," went on the tunnel contractor.
"Those rivals of ours, Blakeson & Grinder, are unscrupulous fellows.
They feel very bitter about not getting the contract, I hear. And they
would be only too glad to have us fail in the work. That would mean
that they, as the next lowest bidders, would be given the job. And we
would have to make up the difference out of our pockets, as well as
lose all the work we have, so far, put on the tunnel."

"And you don't want that to happen!"

"I guess not, my boy! Well, it won't happen if we get there in time
with this new explosive of yours. That will do the business I'm sure."

"I hope so," murmured Tom. "Well, we'll soon see. And now I think I'll
go and write a few letters. We are going to put in at Panama, and I can
mail them there."

Tom started for his stateroom, and rapidly put his hand in the inner
pocket of his coat. He drew out a bundle of letters and papers, and, as
he looked at them, a cry of astonishment came from his lips.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Titus.

"Matter!" cried Tom. "Why here's a letter from Mary--from Mr. Nestor,"
he went on, as he scanned the familiar handwriting. "I never opened it!
Let's see--when did I get that?"

His memory went back to the day of his departure from Shopton when he
had sent Mary the gift, and he recalled that the letter had arrived
just as he was getting into the automobile.

"I stuck it in my pocket with some other mail," he mused, "and I never
thought of it again until just now. But this is the first time I've
worn this coat since that day. A letter from Mr. Nestor! Probably Mary
wrote, thanking me for the box, and her father addressed the envelope
for her. Well, let's see what it says."

Tom retired to the privacy of his stateroom to read the note, but he
had not glanced over more than the first half of it before he cried out:

"Dynamite! Great Scott! What does this mean? 'Gross carelessness! Poor
idea of a joke! No person with your idea of responsibility will ever be
my son-in-law!' Box labeled 'open with care!' Why--why--what does it
all mean?"

Tom read the letter over again, and his murmurs of astonishment were so
loud that Mr. Damon, in the next room, called out:

"What's the matter, Tom? Get bad news?"

"Bad news? I should say so! Mary--her father--he forbids me to see her
again. Says I tried to dynamite them all--or at least scare them into
believing I was going to. I can't understand it!"

"Tell me about it, Tom," suggested Mr. Damon, coming into Tom's
stateroom. "Bless my gunpowder keg! what does it mean?"

Thereupon Tom told of having purchased the gift for Mary, and of
having, at the last minute, told Eradicate to put it in a box and
deliver it at the Nestor home.

"Which he evidently did," Tom went on, "but when it got there Mary's
present was in a box labeled 'Dynamite. Handle with care.' I never sent
that."

Mr. Damon read over Mr. Nestor's letter which had lain so long in Tom's
pocket unopened.

"I think I see how it happened," said the old man.  "Eradicate can't
read; can he, Tom?"

"No, but he pretends he can."

"And did you have any empty boxes marked dynamite in your laboratory?"

"Why yes, I believe I did. I used dynamite as one of the ingredients of
my new explosive."

"Well then, it's as clear as daylight. Eradicate, being unable to read,
took one of the empty dynamite boxes in which to pack Mary's present.
That's how it happened."

Tom thought for a moment. Then he burst into a laugh.

"That's it," he said, a bit ruefully. "That's the explanation. No
wonder Mr. Nestor was roiled. He thought I was playing a joke. I'll
have to explain. But how?"

"By letter," said Mr. Damon.

"Too slow. I'll send a wireless," decided Tom, and he began the
composition of a message that cost him considerable in tolls before he
had hit on the explanation that suited him.

"That ought to clear the atmosphere," he said when the wireless had
shot his message into the ether. "Whew!  And to think, all this while,
Mary and her folks have believed that I tried to play a miserable joke
on them! My! My! I wonder if they'll ever forgive me. When I get hold
of Eradicate--"

"Better teach him to read if he's going to do up love packages,"
interrupted Mr. Damon, dryly.

"I will," decided the young inventor.

The Bellaconda stopped at Panama and then kept on her way south. Soon
after that she ran into a severe tropical storm, and for a time there
was some excitement among the passengers. The more timid of them put on
life preservers, though the captain and his officers assured them there
was no danger.

Tom and Mr. Titus, descending from the deck, whence they had been
warned by one of the mates, were on their way to their stateroom,
walking with some difficulty owing to the roll of the ship.

As they approached their quarters the door of a stateroom farther up
the passage opened, and a head was thrust out.

"Will you send a steward to me?" a man requested. "I am feeling very
ill, and need assistance."

"Certainly," Tom answered, and at that moment he heard Mr. Titus utter
an exclamation.

"What is it?" asked Tom, for the man who had appealed for help, had
withdrawn his head.

"That--that man!" exclaimed the contractor. "That was Waddington, the
tool of our rivals."

"Waddington!" repeated Tom, with a look at the now closed door. "Why,
the bearded man has that stateroom--the bearded man who so nearly lost
the steamer. He isn't Waddington!"

"And I tell you Waddington is in that room!" insisted the contractor.
"I only saw the upper part of his face, but I'd know his eyes anywhere.
Waddington is spying on us!"




Chapter IX

The Bomb


Tom Swift and Mr. Titus withdrew a little way down the corridor, around
a bulkhead and out of sight of any one who might look out from the
stateroom whence had come the appeal for help. But, at the same time,
they could keep watch over it.

"I tell you Waddington is in there!" insisted Mr. Titus, hoarsely
whispering.

"Well, perhaps he may be," admitted Tom. "But several times I have seen
the bearded man going in there, and it's only a single stateroom, for
it's so marked on the deck plan."

"Waddington might be disguised with a false beard, Tom."

"Yes, he might. But did the man who just now looked out have a beard?"

"I couldn't tell, as I saw only the upper part of his face. But those
were Waddington's shifty eyes, I'm positive."

"If Waddington were on board don't you suppose you would have seen him
before this?"

"Not positively, no. If he and the bearded man are one and the same
that would account for it. But I haven't noticed the bearded man once
since he came aboard in such a hurry."

"Nor have I, now that I come to think of it," Tom admitted. "However,
there is an easy way to prove who is in there."

"How?"

"We'll knock on the door and go in."

"Perhaps he won't let us."

"He'll think it's the steward he called for. Come, you know Waddington
better than I do. You knock and go in."

"I don't know Waddington very well," admitted the contractor. "I have
only seen him a few times, but I am sure that was he. But what shall I
do when he sees I'm not the steward?"

"Tell him you have sent for one. I'll go with the message, so it will
be true enough. Even if you have only a momentary glance at him in
close quarters you ought to be able to tell whether or not he has on a
false beard, and whether or not it is Waddington."

Mr. Titus considered for a moment, and then he said:

"Yes, I guess that is a good plan. You go for the steward, Tom, and
I'll see if I can get in that stateroom. But I'm sure I'm not mistaken.
I'll find Waddington in there, perhaps in the person of the bearded
man, disguised. Or else they are using a single stateroom as a double
one." And while Tom went off down the pitching and rolling corridor to
find a steward, Mr. Titus, not without some apprehension, advanced to
knock on the door of the suspect.

"If it is Waddington he'll know me at once, of course," thought the
contractor, "and there may be a row. Well, I can't help it. The success
of my brother and myself depends on finishing that tunnel, and we can't
have Waddington, and those whose tool he is, interfering. Here goes!"

He tapped on the door, and a faint voice called:

"Come in!"

The contractor entered, and saw the bearded man lying in his berth.

"Is there anything I can do for you?" asked the contractor, bending
close over the man. He wanted to see if the beard were false. Somewhat
to his surprise the contractor saw that undoubtedly it was real.

"Steward, will you kindly get me--Oh, you're not the steward!" the
bearded man exclaimed.

"No, my friend and I heard you call," replied the contractor. "He has
gone for the steward, who will be here soon. Can I do anything for you
in the meanwhile?"

"No--not a thing!" was the rather snappish answer, and the man turned
his face away. "I beg your pardon," he went on, as if conscious that he
had acted rudely, "but I am suffering very much. The steward knows just
what I want. I have had these attacks before. I am a poor sailor. If
you will send the steward to me I will be obliged to you. He can fix me
up."

"Very well," assented Mr. Titus. "But if there is anything I can do--"

At that moment footsteps and voices were heard in the corridor, and as
the door of the bearded man's stateroom was opened, Mr. Titus had a
glimpse of Tom and one of the stewards.

"Yes, I'll look after him," the steward said "He's been this way
before. Thank you, sir, for calling me."

"I guess the steward has been well tipped," thought Tom.  As Mr. Titus
came out and the door was shut, the young inventor asked in a whisper,

"Well, was it he?"

The contractor shook his head.

"No," he answered. "I never was more surprised in my life.  I felt sure
it was Waddington in there, but it wasn't. That man's beard is real,
and while he has a look like Waddington about the eyes and upper part
of his face, the man is a stranger to me. That is I think so, but in
spite of all that, I have a queer feeling that I have met him before."

"Where?" Tom inquired.

"That I can't say," and the tunnel contractor shook his head. "Whew!
That was a bad one!" he exclaimed, as the steamer pitched and tossed in
an alarming manner.

"Yes, the storm seems to be getting worse instead of better," agreed
Tom. "I hope none of the cargo shifts and comes banging up against my
new explosive. If it does, there'll be no more tunnel digging for any
of us."

"Better not mention the fact of the explosives on board," suggested Mr.
Titus.

"I won't," promised Tom. "The passengers are frightened enough as it
is. But I watched the powder being stored away.  I guess it is safe."

The storm raged for two days before it began to die away.  Meanwhile,
nothing was seen, on deck or in the dining cabins, of the bearded man.

Tom and Mr. Titus made some guarded inquiries of the steward who had
attended the sick man, and from him learned that he was down on the
passenger list as Senor Pinto, from Rio de Janeiro, Brazil. He was
traveling in the interests of a large firm of coffee importers of the
United States, and was going to Lima.

"And there's no trace of Waddington?" asked Tom of Mr. Titus, as they
were discussing matters in their stateroom one day.

"Not a trace. He seems to have dropped out of sight, and I'm glad of
it."

"Perhaps Blakeson & Grinder have given up the fight against you."

"I wish they had, though I don't look for any such good luck. But I'm
willing to fight them, now that we have an even chance, thanks to your
explosive."

The storm blew itself out. The Bellaconda "crossed the line," and there
was the usual horseplay among the sailors when Father Neptune came
aboard to hold court. Those who had never before been below the equator
were made to undergo more or less of an initiation, being lathered and
shaved, and then pushed backward into a canvas tank of water on deck.

While Tom enjoyed the voyage, with the possible exception of the storm,
he was anxious, and so was Mr. Titus, for the time to come when they
should get to the tunnel and try the effect of the new explosive. Mr.
Damon found an elderly gentleman as fond of playing chess as was the
eccentric man himself, and his days were fully occupied with castles,
pawns, knights, kings, queens and so on. As for Koku he was taken in
charge by the sailors and found life forward very agreeable.

Senor Pinto had recovered from his seasickness, the steward told Tom
and Mr. Titus, but still he kept to his stateroom.

It was when the Bellaconda was within a day or two of Callao that a
wireless message was received for Mr. Titus.  It was from his brother.
The message read:


"Have information from New York office that rivals are after you. Look
out for explosive."


"What does that mean?" asked Tom.

"Well, I presume it means our rival contractors know we have a supply
of your new powder on board, and they may try to get it away from us."

"Why?" Tom demanded.

"To prevent our using it to complete the tunnel. In that case they'll
get the secret of it to use for themselves, when the contract goes to
them by default. Can we do anything to protect the powder, Tom?"

"Well, I don't know that we'll need to while it's stowed away in the
cargo. They can't get at it any more than we can, until the ship
unloads. I guess it's safe enough. We'll just have to keep our eyes
open when it's taken out of the hold, though."

Tom and Mr. Titus, both of whom were fond of fresh air and exercise,
had made it a practice to get up an hour before breakfast and take a
constitutional about the steamer deck.  They did this as usual the
morning after the wireless warning was received, and they were standing
near the port rail, talking about this, when they heard a thud on the
deck behind them. Both turned quickly, and saw a round black object
rolling toward them. From the object projected what seemed to be a
black cord, and the end of this cord was glowing and smoking.

For a moment neither Tom nor Mr. Titus spoke. Then, as a slow motion of
the ship rolled the round black thing toward Tom, he cried:

"It a bomb!"

He darted toward it, but Mr. Titus pulled him back.

"Run!" yelled the contractor.

Before either of them could do anything, a queer figure of an elderly
gentleman stepped partly from behind a deck-house, and stooped over the
smoking object.

"Look out!" yelled Mr. Titus, crouching low. "That's an explosive bomb!
Toss it overboard!"




Chapter X

Professor Bumper


Fairly fascinated by the spluttering fuse, neither Tom nor Mr. Titus
moved for a second, while the deadly fire crept on through the black
string-like affair, nearer and nearer to the bomb itself.

Then, just as Tom, holding back his natural fear, was about to thrust
the thing overboard with his foot, hardly realizing that it might be
even more deadly to the ship in the water than it was on the deck, the
foot of the newcomer was suddenly thrust out from behind the
deck-house, and the sizzling fuse was trodden upon.

It went out in a puff of smoke, but the owner of the foot was not
satisfied with that for a hand reached down, lifted the bomb, the fuse
of which still showed a smouldering spark of fire, and calmly pulled
out the "tail" of the explosive.  It was harmless then, for the fuse,
with a trail of smoke following, was tossed into the sea, and the
little man came out from behind the deck-house, holding the unexploded
bomb.

For a moment neither Tom nor Mr. Titus could speak. They felt an
inexpressible sense of relief. Then Tom managed to gasp out:

"You--you saved our lives!"

The little man who had stepped on the fuse, and had then torn it from
the bomb, looked at the object in his hand as though it were the most
natural thing in the world to pick explosives up off the deck of
passenger steamers, as he remarked:

"Well, perhaps I did. Yes, I think it would have gone off in another
second or two. Rather curious; isn't it?"

"Curious? Curious!" asked and exclaimed Mr. Titus.

"Why, yes," went on the little man, in the most matter of fact tone.
"You see, most explosive bombs are round, made that way so the force
will be equal in all directions. But this one, you notice, has a bulge,
or protuberance, on one side, so to speak. Very curious!

"It might have been made that way to prevent its rolling overboard, or
the bomb's walls might be weaker near that bulge to make sure that the
force of the explosion would be in that direction. And the bulge was
pointed toward you gentlemen, if you noticed."

"I should say I did!" cried Mr. Titus. "My dear sir, you have put us
under a heavy debt to you! You saved our lives!  I--I am in no frame of
mind to thank you now, but--"

He strode over to the little man, holding out his hand.

"No, no, I'd better keep it," went on the person who had rendered the
bomb ineffective. "You might drop it you know.  You are nervous--your
hand shakes."

"I want to shake hands with you!" exclaimed Mr. Titus--"to thank you!"

"Oh, that's it. I thought you wanted the bomb. Shake hands? Certainly!"

And while this ceremony was being gone through with, Tom had a moment
to study the appearance of the man who had saved their lives. He had
seen the passenger once or twice before, but had taken no special
notice of him. Now he had good reason to observe him.

Tom beheld a little, thin man, little in the sense of being of the
"bean pole" construction. His head was as bald as a billiard ball, as
the young inventor could notice when the stranger took off his hat to
bow formally in response to the greeting of some ladies who passed,
while Mr. Titus was shaking hands with him.

The bald head was sunk down between two high shoulders, and when the
owner wished to observe anything closely, as he was now observing the
bomb, the head was thrust forward somewhat as an eagle might do. And
Tom noticed that the eyes of the little man were as bright as those of
an eagle.  Nothing seemed to escape them.

"I want to add my thanks to those of Mr. Titus for saving our lives,"
said Tom, as he advanced. "We don't know what to make of it all, but
you certainly stopped that bomb from going off."

"Yes, perhaps I did," admitted the little man coolly and calmly, as
though preventing bomb explosions was his daily exercise before
breakfast.

Tom and Mr. Titus introduced themselves by name.

"I am Professor Swyington Bumper," said the bomb-holder, with a bow,
removing his hat, and again disclosing his shiny bald head. "I am very
glad to have met you indeed."

"And we are more than glad," said Tom, fervently, as he glanced at the
explosive.

"Now that the danger is over," went on Mr. Titus, "suppose we make an
investigation, and find out how this bomb came to be here."

"Just what I was about to suggest," remarked Professor Bumper. "Bombs,
such as this, do not sprout of themselves on bare decks. And I take it
this one is explosive."

"Let me look at it," suggested Tom. "I know something of explosives."

It needed but a casual examination on the part of one who had done
considerable experimenting with explosives to disclose the fact that it
had every characteristic of a dangerous bomb. Only the pulling out of
the fuse had rendered it harmless.

"If it had gone off," said Tom, "we would both have been killed, or, at
least, badly injured, Mr. Titus."

"I believe you, Tom. And we owe our lives to Professor Bumper."

"I'm glad I could be of service, gentlemen," the scientist remarked, in
an easy tone. "Explosives are out of my line, but I guessed it was
rather dangerous to let this go off.  Have you any idea how it got
here?"

"Not in the least," said Tom. "But some one must have placed it here,
or dropped it behind us."

"Would any one have an object in doing such a thing?" the professor
asked.

Tom and Mr. Titus looked at one another.

"Waddington!" murmured the contractor. "If he were on board I should
say he might have done it to get us out of the way, though I would not
go so far as to say he meant to kill us. It may be this bomb has only a
light charge in it, and he only meant to cripple us."

"We'll find out about that," said Tom. "I'll open it."

"Better be careful," urged Mr. Titus.

"I will," the young inventor promised. "I beg your pardon," he went on
to Professor Bumper. "We have been talking about something of which you
know nothing. Briefly, there is a certain man who is trying to
interfere in some work in which Mr. Titus and I are interested, and we
think, if he were on board, he might have placed this bomb where it
would injure us."

"Is he here?" asked the professor.

"No. And that is what makes it all the more strange," said Mr. Titus.
"At one time I thought he was here, but I was mistaken."

Tom took the now harmless bomb to his stateroom, and there, after
taking the infernal machine apart, he discovered that it was not as
dangerous as he had at first believed.

The bomb contained no missiles, and though it held a quantity of
explosive, it was of a slow burning kind. Had it gone off it would have
sent out a sheet of flame that would have severely burned him and Mr.
Titus, but unless complications had set in death would not have
resulted.

"They just wanted to disable us," said the contractor.  "That was their
game. Tom, who did it?"

"I don't know. Did you ever see this Professor Bumper before?"

"I never did."

"And did it strike you as curious that he should happen to be so near
at hand when the bomb fell behind us?"

"I hadn't thought of that," admitted the contractor. "Do you mean that
he might have dropped it himself?"

"Well, I wouldn't go so far as to say that," replied Tom, slowly. "But
I think it would be a good idea to find out all we can of Professor
Swyington Bumper."

"I agree with you, Tom. We'll investigate him."




Chapter XI

In the Andes


Professor Swyington Bumper seemed to live in a region all by himself.
Though he was on board the Bellaconda, he might just as well have been
in an airship, or riding along on the back of a donkey, as far as his
knowledge, or recognition, of his surroundings went. He seemed to be
thinking thoughts far, far away, and he was never without a
book--either a bound volume or a note-book. In the former he buried his
hawk-like nose, and Tom, looking over his shoulder once, saw that the
book was printed in curious characters, which, later, he learned were
Sanskrit. If he had a note-book the bald-headed professor was
continually jotting down memoranda in it.

"I can hardly think of him as a conspirator against us," said Tom to
Mr. Titus.

"After you have been in the contracting business as long as I have
you'll distrust every one," was the answer.  "Waddington isn't on
board, or I'd distrust him. That Spaniard, Senor Pinto, seems to be out
of consideration, and there only remains the professor. We must watch
him."

But Professor Bumper proved to be above suspicion.  Carefully guarded
inquiries made of the captain, the purser and other ships' officers,
brought out the fact that he was well known to all of them, having
traveled on the line before.

"He is making a search for something, but he won't say what it is," the
captain said. "At first we thought it was gold or jewels, for he goes
away off into the Andes Mountains, where both gold and jewels have been
found. He never looks for treasure, though, for though some of his
party have made rather rich discoveries, he takes no interest in them."

"What is he after then?" asked Mr. Titus.

"No one knows, and he won't tell. But whatever it is he has never found
it yet. Always, when he comes back, unsuccessful, from a trip to the
interior and goes back North with us, he will remark that he has not
the right directions. That he must seek again.

"Back he comes next season, as full of hope as before, but only to be
disappointed. Each time he goes to a new place in the mountains where
he digs and delves, so members of the parties he hires tell me, but
with no success. He carries with him something in a small iron box,
and, whatever this is, he consults it from time to time. It may be
directions for finding whatever he is after. But there seems to be
something wrong."

"This is quite a mystery," remarked Tom.

"It certainly is. But Professor Bumper is a fine man. I have known him
for years."

"This seems to dispose of the theory that he planted the bomb, and that
he is one of the plotters in the pay of Blakeson & Grinder," said Mr.
Titus, when he and Tom were alone.

"Yes, I guess it does. But who can have done it?"

That was a question neither could answer.

Tom had a theory, which he did not disclose to Mr. Titus, that, after
all, the somewhat mysterious Senor Pinto might, in some way, be mixed
up in the bomb attempt. But a close questioning of the steward on duty
near the foreigner's cabin at the time disclosed the fact that Pinto
had been ill in his berth all that day.

"Well, unless the bomb fell from some passing airship, I don't see how
it got on deck," said Tom with a shake of his head. "And I'm sure no
airship passed over us."

They had kept the matter secret, not telling even Mr. Damon, for they
feared the eccentric man would make a fuss and alarm the whole vessel.
So Mr. Damon, occasionally blessing his necktie or his shoe laces,
played chess with his elderly gentleman friend and was perfectly happy.

That Professor Bumper not only had kept his promise about not
mentioning the bomb, but that he had forgotten all about it, was
evident a day or two after the happening. Tom and Mr. Titus passed him
on deck, and bowed cordially. The professor returned the salutation,
but looked at the two in a puzzled sort of fashion.

"I beg your pardon," he remarked, "but your faces are familiar, though
I cannot recall your names. Haven't I seen you before?"

"You have," said Tom, with a smile. "You saved our lives from a bomb
the other day."

"Oh, yes! So I did! So I did!" exclaimed Professor Bumper.  "I felt
sure I had seen you before. Are you all right?"

"Yes. There haven't been any more bombs thrown at us," the contractor
said. "By the way, Professor Bumper, I understand you are quite a
traveler in the Andes, in the vicinity of Lima."

"Yes, I have been there," admitted the bald-headed scientist in guarded
tones.

"Well, I am digging a tunnel in that vicinity," went on Mr. Titus, "and
if you ever get near Rimac, where the first cutting is made, I wish you
would come and see me--Tom too, as he is associated with me."

"Rimac-Rimac," murmured the professor, looking sharply at the
contractor. "Digging a tunnel there? Why are you doing that?" and he
seemed to resent the idea.

"Why, the Peruvian government engaged me to do it to connect the two
railroad lines," was the answer. "Do you know anything about the place?"

"Not so much as I hope to later on," was the unexpected answer. "As it
happens I am going to Rimac, and I may visit your tunnel."

"I wish you would," returned Mr. Titus.

Later on, in their stateroom, the contractor remarked to the young
inventor:

"Sort of queer; isn't it?"

"What?" asked Tom. "His not remembering us?"

"No, though that was odd. But I suppose he is forgetful, or pretends to
be. I mean it's queer he is going to Rimac."

"What do you mean?" asked Tom.

"Well, I don't know exactly what I mean," went on the tunnel
contractor, "but our tunnel happens to start at Rimac, which is a small
town at the base of the mountains."

"Maybe the professor is a geologist," suggested Tom, "and he may want
to get some samples of that hard rock."

"Maybe," admitted Mr. Titus. "But I shall keep my eyes on him all the
same. I'm not going to have any strangers, who happen to be around when
bombs drop near us, get into my tunnel."

"I think you're wrong to doubt Professor Bumper," Tom said.

A few days after this, when Tom and Mr. Titus were casually discussing
the weather on deck and wondering how much longer it would be before
they reached Callao, Mr. Damon, who had been playing numberless games
of chess, came up for a breath of air.

"Mr. Damon," called Tom, "come over here and meet a friend of ours,
Professor Bumper," and he was about to introduce them, for the two, as
far as Tom knew, had not yet met. But no sooner had the professor and
Mr. Damon caught sight of each other than there was a look of mutual
recognition.

"Bless my fountain pen!" cried the eccentric man. "If it isn't my old
friend!"

"Mr. Damon!" cried the professor. "I am delighted to see you again. I
did not know you were on board!"

"Nor I you. Bless my apple dumpling! Are you still after those Peruvian
antiquities?"

"I am, Mr. Damon. But I did not know you were acquainted with Mr.
Swift."

"Oh, Tom and I are old friends."

"Professor Bumper saved the lives of Mr. Titus and myself," said Tom,
"or at least he saved us from severe injury by a bomb."

"Pray do not mention it, my friends," put in the professor, casually.
"It was nothing."

Of course he did not mean it just that way.

Then, naturally, Mr. Damon had to be told all about the bomb for the
first time, and his wonder was great. He blessed everything he could
think of.

"And to think it should be my old friend, Professor Bumper, who saved
you," said the odd man to Tom and Mr. Titus later that day.

"Do you know him well?" asked Mr. Titus.

"Very well indeed. Our drug concern sells him many chemicals for his
experiments."

"Well, if you know him I guess he can't be what I thought he was," the
contractor went on. "I'm glad to know it. Why is he going to the Andes?"

"Oh, for many years he has been interested in collecting Peruvian
antiquities. He has a certain theory in regard to something or other
about their ancient civilization, but just what it is I have, at this
moment, forgotten. Only I know you can thoroughly trust Professor
Bumper, for a finer man never lived, though he is a bit absent-minded
at times.  But you will like him very much."

Thus the last lingering doubt of Professor Bumper was removed. Mr.
Damon told something of how the scientist had been honored by degrees
from many colleges and was regarded as an authority on Peruvian matters.

But who had placed the bomb on deck remained a mystery.

In due time Callao, the seaport of Lima, was reached and our friends
disembarked. Tom saw to the unloading of the explosive, which was to be
sent direct to the tunnel at Rimac. Mr. Titus, Tom and Mr. Damon would
remain in Lima a day or so.

Professor Bumper disembarked with our friends, and stopped at the same
hotel. Tom kept a lookout for Senor Pinto, but did not see him, and
concluded that the Spaniard was ill, and would be carried ashore on a
stretcher, perhaps.

Lima, the principal city and capital of Peru, proved an interesting
place. It was about eight miles inland and was built on an arid plain
about five hundred feet above sea level. Yet, though it was on what
might be termed a desert, the place, by means of irrigation, had been
made into a beauty spot.

Tom found the older part of the city was laid out with mathematical
regularity, each street crossing the other at right angles. But in the
new portions there was not this adherence to straightness.

"Bless my transfer! Why, they have electric cars here!" exclaimed Mr.
Damon, catching sight of one on the line between Callao and the capital.

"What did you think they'd have?" asked Mr. Titus, "elephants or
camels?"

"I--I didn't just know," was the answer.

"Oh, you'll find a deal of civilization here," the contractor said. "Of
course much of the population is negro or Indian, but they are often
rich and able to buy what they want. There is a population of over
150,000, and there are two steam railroads between Callao and Lima,
while there is one running into the interior for 130 miles, crossing
the Andes at an elevation of over three miles. It is a branch of that
road, together with a branch of the one running to Ancon, that I am to
connect with a tunnel."

Tom found some beautiful churches and cathedrals in Lima, and spent
some time visiting them. He and Mr. Damon also visited, in the
outskirts, the tobacco, cocoa and other factories.

Three days after reaching the capital, Mr. Titus having attended to
some necessary business while Mr. Damon set on foot matters connected
with his affairs, it was decided to strike inland to Rimac, and to try
the effect of Tom Swift's explosive on the tunnel.

The journey was to be made in part by rail, though the last stages of
it were over a rough mountain trail, with llamas for beasts of burden,
while our friends rode mules.

As Tom, Mr. Damon, Koku, and Mr. Titus were going to the railroad
station they saw Professor Bumper also leaving the hotel.

"I believe our roads lie together for a time," said the bald-headed
scientist, "and, if you have no objections, I will accompany you."

"Come, and welcome!" exclaimed Mr. Titus, all his suspicions now gone.

"And it may be that you will be able to help me," the scientist went on.

"Help you--how?" asked Tom.

"I will tell you when we reach the Andes," was the mysterious answer.

It was a day later when they left the train at a small station, and
struck off into the foothills of the great Andes Mountains, where the
tunnel was started, that the professor again mentioned his object.

"Friends," he said, as he gazed up at the towering cliffs and crags, "I
am searching for the lost city of Pelone, located somewhere in these
mountains. Will you help me to find it?"




Chapter XII

The Tunnel


Mr. Damon, of the three who heard Professor Bumper make this statement,
showed the least sign of astonishment. It would have been more correct
to say that he showed none at all. But Tom could not restrain himself.

"The lost city of Pelone!" he exclaimed.

"Is it here--in these mountains?" asked Mr. Titus.

"I have reason to hope that it is," went on the professor.  "The golden
tablets are very vague, but I have tried many locations, and now I am
about to try here. I hope I shall succeed. At any rate, I shall have
agreeable company, which has not always been my luck on my previous
expeditions seeking to find the lost city."

"Oh, Professor, are you still on that quest?" asked Mr. Damon, in a
matter-of-fact tone.

"Yes, Mr. Damon, I am. And now that I look about me, and see the shape
of these mountains, I feel that they conform more to the description on
the golden plates than any location I have yet tried. Somehow I feel
that I shall be successful here."

"Did you know Professor Bumper was searching for a lost city of the
Andes?" asked Tom, of his eccentric friend.

"Why yes," answered Mr. Damon. "He has been searching for years to
locate it."

"Why didn't you tell us?" inquired Mr. Titus.

"Why, I never thought of it. Bless my memorandum book! it never
occurred to me. I did not think you would be interested.  Tell them
your story, Professor Bumper."

"I will soon. Just now I must see to my equipment. The story will keep."

And though Tom and Mr. Titus were both anxious to hear about the lost
city, they, too, had much to do to get ready for the trip into the
interior.

The beginning of the tunnel under one of the smaller of the ranges of
the Andes lay two days journey from the end of the railroad line. And
the trip must be made on mules, with llamas as beasts of burden,
transporting the powder and other supplies.

"We'll only need to take enough food with us for the two days," said
Mr. Titus. "We have a regular camp at the tunnel mouth, and my brother
has supplies of grub and other things constantly coming in. We also
have shacks to live in; but on this trip we will use tents, as the
weather at this season is fine."

It was quite a little expedition that set off up the mountain trail
that afternoon, for they had arrived at the end of the railroad line
shortly before dinner, and had eaten at a rather poor restaurant.

Professor Bumper had made up his own exploring party, consisting of
himself and three native Indian diggers with their picks and shovels.
They were to do whatever excavating he decided was necessary to locate
the hidden city.

Several mules and llamas, laden with the new explosive, and burdened
with camp equipment and food, and a few Indian servants made up the
cavalcade of Tom, the contractor, Mr. Damon and Koku. The giant was
almost as much a source of wonder to the Peruvians as he had been on
board the ship.  And he was a great help, too. For some of the Indians
were under-sized, and could not lift the heavy boxes and packages to
the backs of the beasts of burden.

But Koku, thrusting the little men aside, grasped with one hand what
two of them had tried in vain to lift, and set it on the back of mule
or llama.

The way was rough but they took their time to it, for the trail was an
ascending one. Above and beyond them towered the great Andes, and Tom,
gazing up into the sky, which in places seemed almost pierced by the
snow-covered peaks, saw some small black specks moving about.

"Condors," said Mr. Titus, when his attention was called to them. "Some
of them are powerful birds, and they sometimes pick up a sheep and make
off with it, though usually their food consists of carrion."

They went into camp before the sun went down, for it grew dark soon
after sunset, and they wanted to be prepared.  Supper was made ready by
the Indian helpers, and when this was over, and they sat about a camp
fire, Tom said:

"Now, Professor Bumper, perhaps you'll explain about the lost city."

"I wish I could explain about it," began the scientist.  "For years I
have dreamed of finding it, but always I have been disappointed. Now,
perhaps, my luck may change."

"Do you think it may be near here?" asked Mr. Titus, motioning toward
the dark and frowning peaks all about them.

"It may be. The signs are most encouraging. In brief, the story of the
lost city of Pelone is this. Thousands of years ago--in fact I do not
know how many--there existed somewhere in Peru an ancient city that was
the centre of civilization for this region. Older it was than the
civilization of the Mexicans--the Montezumas--older and more cultured.

"It is many years since I became interested in Peruvian antiquities,
and then I had no idea of the lost city. But some of the antiques I
picked up contained in their inscriptions references to Pelone. At
first I conceived this to be a sort of god, a deity, or perhaps a
powerful ruler.  But as I went on in my work of gathering ancient
things from Peru, I saw that the name Pelone referred to a city--a seat
of government, whence everything had its origin.

"Then I got on the track more closely. I examined ancient documents. I
found traces of an ancient language and writings, different from
anything else in the world. I managed to construct an alphabet and to
read some of the documents. From them I learned that Pelone was a city
situated in some fertile valley of the Andes. It had existed for
thousands of years; it was the seat of learning and culture. Much light
would be thrown on the lives of the people who lived in Peru before the
present races inhabited it, if I could but locate Pelone.

"Then I came across two golden tablets on which were graven the
information that Pelone had utterly vanished."

"How?" asked Tom.

"The golden tablets did not say. They simply stated the fact that
Pelone was lost, and one sentence read: 'He who shall find it again
shall be richly rewarded.' But it is not for that that I seek. It is
that I may give to the world the treasures it must contain--the
treasures of an ancient civilization."

"And how do you think the city disappeared?" asked Mr. Titus.

"I do not know. Whether it was destroyed by enemies, whether it was
buried under the ashes of a volcano, whether it still exists, deserted
and solitary in some valley amid the mountain fastnesses of the Andes,
I do not know. But I am certain the city once existed, and it may exist
yet, though it may be in dust-covered ruins. That is what I seek to
find. See! Here are the tablets telling about it. I got them from an
old Peruvian grave."

He took from a box two thin sheets of yellow metal. They were covered
with curious marks, but Tom and the others could make nothing of them.
Only Professor Bumper was able to decipher them.

"And that is the story of the lost city of Pelone--as much as I know,"
he said. "For years I have sought it. If I can find it I shall be
famous, for I shall have added to human knowledge."

"If the people of that city wrote on golden tablets, the yellow metal
must have been plentiful," commented Mr. Titus.  "You might strike a
rich mine."

"I have no use for riches," said the professor.

"Well, I have," the contractor said, with a laugh. "That's why I'm
putting through this tunnel. And if my brother and I don't do it we'll
be in a bad way financially. We have struck traces of gold, but not in
paying quantities. I should like to see this lost city of yours,
Professor Bumper. It may contain gold."

"You may have all the gold, if I am allowed to keep the antiquities we
find," stipulated the scientist. "Then you will help me in my search?"

"As much as we can spare time for from the tunnel work," promised Mr.
Titus. "I'll instruct my men to keep their eyes open for any sign of
ancient writings on the rocks we blast out."

"Thank you," said the professor.

The night passed uneventfully enough, if one excepts the mosquitoes
which seemed to get through the nets, making life miserable for all.
And once Tom thought he heard gruntings in the bush back of the tent,
which noises might, he imagined, have been caused by a bear. Toward
morning he heard an unearthly screech in the woods, and one of the
Indians, tending the fire, grunted out a word which meant pumas.

"I can see it isn't going to be dull here," Tom mused, as he turned
over and tried to sleep.

Breakfast made them all feel better, and they set off on the final
stage of their journey.

"If all goes well we'll be at the tunnel entrance and camp to-night,"
said the contractor. "This second half of the trip is the roughest."

There was no need of saying that, for it was perfectly evident. The
trail was a most precarious one, and only a mule or llama could have
traveled it. The mules were most sure-footed, but, as it was, one
slipped, and came near falling over a cliff.

But no real accident occurred, and finally, about an hour before
sunset, the cavalcade turned down the slope and emerged on a level
plain, which ended against the face of a great cliff.

As Tom rode nearer the cliff he could make out around it groups of rude
buildings, covered with corrugated iron.  There was quite a settlement
it seemed.

Then, in the face of the cliff there showed something black--like a
blot of ink, though more regular in outline.

"The mouth of the tunnel," said Mr. Titus to Tom. "Come on over to the
office and I'll introduce you to my brother. I guess he will be glad
we've arrived."

Tom dismounted from his mule, an example followed by the others.
Professor Bumper gazed up at the great mountains and murmured:

"I wonder if the lost city of Pelone lies among them?"

Suddenly the silence of the evening was broken by a dull, rumbling
sound.

"Bless my court plaster!" cried Mr. Damon. "What's that?"

"A blast," answered Mr. Titus. "But I never knew them to set off one so
late before. I hope nothing is wrong!"

And, as he spoke, panic-stricken men began running out of the mouth of
the tunnel, while those outside hastened toward them, shouting and
calling.




Chapter XIII

Tom's Explosive


"Something has happened!" cried Mr. Titus as he ran forward, followed
by Tom, Mr. Damon and Koku. Professor Bumper started with them, but on
the way he saw a curious bit of rock which he stopped to pick up and
examine.

At the entrance of the tunnel, from which came rushing dirt-stained and
powder-blackened men, Mr. Titus was met by a man who seemed to be in
authority.

"Hello, Job!" he cried. "Glad you're back. We're in trouble!"

"What's the matter?" was the question. "This is my brother Walter," he
said. "This is Tom Swift and Mr. Damon," thus hurriedly he introduced
them. "What happened, Walter?"

"Premature blast. Third one this week. Somebody is working against us!"

"Never mind that now," cried Job Titus. "We must see to the poor
fellows who are hurt." "I guess there aren't many," his brother said.
"They were on their way out when the charge went off. Some more of
Blakeson & Grinder's work, I'll wager!"

They were rushing in to the smoke-filled tunnel now, followed by Tom,
Mr. Damon and Koku, who would follow his young master anywhere. Tom saw
that the tunnel was lighted with incandescent lamps, suspended here and
there from the rocky roof or sides. The electric lights were supplied
with current from a dynamo run by a gasoline engine.

"Where is it, Serato? Where was the blast?" asked Walter Titus, of a
tall Indian, who seemed to be in some authority.

"Back at second turn," was the answer, in fairly good English. "I go
get beds."

"He means stretchers," translated Job. "That's our Peruvian foreman. A
good fellow, but easily scared."

They ran on into the tunnel, Tom and Mr. Damon noticing that a small
narrow-gage railroad was laid on the floor, mules being the motive
power to bring out the small dump cars loaded with rock and dirt,
excavated from the big hole.

"Mind the turn!" called Job Titus, who was ahead of Tom and Mr. Damon.
"It's rough here."

Tom found it so, for he slipped over some pieces of rock, and would
have fallen had not Koku held him up.

"Thanks," gasped Tom, as on he ran.

A little later he came to a place where a cluster of electric lights
gave better illumination, and he could see it was there that the damage
had been done.

A number of men were lying on the dirt and rock floor of the tunnel,
and some of them were bleeding. Others were staggering about as though
shocked or stunned.

"We must get the injured ones out of here!" cried Walter Titus. "Where
are the men with stretchers?"

"I sint that Spalapeen Serato for thim!" broke in a voice, rich in
Irish brogue. "But he's thot stupid he might think I was after sindin'
him fer wather!"

"No, Tim. Serato is after the stretchers all right," said Walter. "We
passed him on the way."

"That's Tim Sullivan, our Irish foreman, though he has only a few of
his own kind to boss," explained Job Titus in a whisper.

Some of the workmen (all of whom save the few Irish referred to were
Peruvian Indians) had now recovered from their shock, or fright, and
began to help the Titus brothers, Tom, Mr. Damon and Koku in looking
after the injured. Of these there were five, only two of whom were,
seemingly, seriously hurt.

"Me take them out," said Koku, and placing one gently over his left
shoulder, and the other over his right, out of the tunnel he stalked
with them, not waiting for the stretchers.

And it was well he did so, for one man was in need of an immediate
operation, which was performed at the rude hospital the contractors
maintained at the tunnel mouth. The other man died as Koku was carrying
him out, but the giant had saved one life.

Serato, the Indian foreman, with some of his men now came in, and the
other injured were carried out on stretchers, being attended to by the
two doctors who formed part of the tunnel force. Among a large body of
men some were always falling ill or getting hurt, and in that wild
country a doctor had to be kept near at hand.

When the excitement had died down, and it was found that one death
would be the total toll of the accident and that the premature blast
had done no damage to the tunnel, the two Titus brothers began to
consider matters.

Tom, Mr. Damon and the two contractors sat in the main office and
talked things over. Koku was eating supper, though the others had
finished, but, naturally, it took Koku twice as long as any one else.
Professor Bumper was busy transcribing material in his note-book.

"Well, I'm glad you've come back, Job," said his brother.  "Things have
been going at sixes and sevens here since you went to get some new kind
of blasting powder. By the way, I hope you got it, for we are
practically at a standstill."

"Oh, I got it all right--some of Tom Swift's best--specially made for
us. And, better still, I've brought Tom back with me."

"So I see. Well, I'm glad he's here."

"Now what about this accident to-day?" went on Job.

"Well, as I said, it's the third this week. All of them seemed to be
premature blasts. But I've sent for some of the fuses used. I'm going
to get at the bottom of this. Here is Sullivan with them now. Come in,
Tim," he called, as the Irishman knocked at the door.

"Are they the fuses used in the blasts?" Walter asked.

"They are, sor. An' they mostly burn five minutes, which is plenty of
time fer all th' min t' git out of danger. Only this time th' fuse
didn't seem to burn more than a minute, an' I lit it meself."

"Let's see how long they burn now," suggested Job.

One of the longer fuses was lighted. It spluttered and smoked, while
the contractors timed it with their watches.

"Four minutes!" exclaimed Job. "That's queer, and they're the regular
ten minute length. I wonder what this means.

He took up another fuse, and examined it closely.

"Why!" he cried. "These aren't our fuses at all. They're another make,
and much more rapid in burning. No wonder you've been having premature
blasts. They go off in about half the time they should."

"I can't understhand thot!" said Tim, thoughtfully. "I keep all the
fuses locked up, and only take thim out when I need thim."

"Then somebody has been at your box, Tim, and they took out our regular
fuses and put in these quicker ones. It's a game to make trouble for us
among our men, and to damage the tunnel."

"Bless my rubber boots!" cried Mr. Damon. "Who would do a thing like
that?"

"Our rivals, perhaps, though I do not like to accuse any man on such
small evidence," said Walter. "But we must adopt new measures."

"And be very careful of the fuses," said Job.

"Thot's what I will!" declared Tim. "I'll put th' supply in a new
place. No wonder there was blasts before th' min could git out th' way!
Bad cess t' th' imps thot did this!" and he banged his big fist down on
the table.

Since the trouble began a guard had been always posted around the
tunnel entrance and surrounding buildings, and this night the patrol
was doubled. Tom, Mr. Damon and the two Titus brothers sat up quite
late, talking over plans and ideas.

Professor Bumper went to bed early, as he said he was going to set off
before sunrise to make a search for the lost city.

"I regard him as more or less of a visionary," said Mr. Job Titus; "but
he seems a harmless gentleman, and we'll do all we can to help him."

"Surely," agreed his brother.

The night was not marked by any disturbance, and after breakfast, Tom,
under the guidance of the Titus brothers, looked over the tunnel with a
view to making his first experiment with the new explosive.

The tunnel was being driven straight into the face of one of the
smaller ranges of the Andes Mountains. It was to be four miles in
length, and when it emerged on the other side it would enable trains to
make connections between the two railroads, thus tapping a rich and
fertile country.

On the site of the tunnel, which was two days' mule travel east from
Rimac, the Titus brothers had assembled their heavy machinery. They had
brought some of their own men, including Tim Sullivan, with them, but
the other labor was that of Peruvian Indians, with a native foreman,
Serato, over them.

There were engines, boilers, dynamos, motors, diamond drills, steam
shovels and a miniature railway, with mules as the motive power. A
small village had sprung up at the tunnel mouth, and there was a
general store, besides many buildings for the sleeping and eating
quarters of the laborers, as well as places where the white men could
live.  Their quarters were some distance from the native section.

Powder, supplies, in fact everything save what game could be obtained
in the forest, or what grains or fruits were brought in by natives
living near by, had to be brought over the rough trail. But Titus
Brothers had a large experience in engineering matters in wild and
desolate countries, and they knew how to be as comfortable as possible.

Mr. Damon learned that one of the districts whence his company had been
in the habit of getting quinine was distant a day's journey over the
mountain, so he decided to make the trip, with a native guide, and see
if he could get at the bottom of the difficulty in forwarding shipments.

This was a few days after the arrival of our friends.  Meanwhile, Tom
had been shown all through the tunnel by the Titus Brothers and had had
his first sight of the hard cliff of rock which seemed to be a
veritable stone wall in the way of progress--or at least such progress
as was satisfactory to the contractors.

"Well, we'll try what some of my explosive will do," said Tom, when he
had finished the examination. "I don't claim it will be as successful
as the sample blast we set off at Shopton, but we'll do our best."

Holes were drilled in the face of the rock, and several charges of the
new explosive tamped in. Wires were attached to the fuses, which were
of a new kind, and warning was given to clear the tunnel. The wires ran
out to the mouth of the horizontal shaft and Tom, holding the switch in
his hand made ready to set off the blast.

"Are they all out?" he asked Tim Sullivan, who had emerged, herding the
Indian laborers before him. Tim insisted on being the last man to seek
safety when an explosion was to take place.

"All ready, sor," answered the foreman.

"Here she goes!" cried Tom, as his fingers closed the circuit.




Chapter XIV

Mysterious Disappearances


There was a dull, muffled report, a sort of rumbling that seemed to
extend away down under the earth and then echo back again until the
ground near the mouth of the tunnel, where the party was standing,
appeared to rock and heave.  There followed a cloud of yellow, heavy
smoke which made one choke and gasp, and Tom, seeing it, cried:

"Down! Down, everybody! There's a back draft, and if you breathe any of
that powder vapor you'll have a fearful headache! Get down, until the
smoke rises!"

The tunnel contractors and their men understood the danger, for they
had handled explosives before. It is a well-known fact that the fumes
of dynamite and other giant powders will often produce severe
headaches, and even illness. Tom's explosive contained a certain
percentage of dynamite, and he knew its ill effects. Stretched prone,
or crouching on the ground, there was little danger, as the fumes,
being lighter than air, rose. The yellow haze soon drifted away, and it
was safe to rise.

"Well, I wonder how much rock your explosive tore loose for us, Tom,"
observed Job Titus, as he looked at the thin, yellowish cloud of smoke
that was still lazily drifting from the tunnel.

"Can't tell until we go in and take a look," replied the young
inventor. "It won't be safe to go in for a while yet, though. That
smoke will hang in there a long time. I didn't think there'd be a back
draft."

"There is, for we've often had the same trouble with our shots," Walter
Titus said. "I can't account for it unless there is some opening in the
shaft, connecting with the outer air, which admits a wind that drives
the smoke out of the mouth, instead of forward into the blast hole.
It's a queer thing and we haven't been able to get at the bottom of it."

"That's right," agreed his brother. "We've looked for some opening, or
natural shaft, but haven't been able to find it.  Sometimes we shoot
off a charge and everything goes well, the smoke disappears in a few
minutes. Again it will all blow out this way and we lose half a day
waiting for the air to clear. There's a hidden shaft, or natural
chimney, I'm sure, but we can't find it."

"Thot blast didn't make much racket," commented Tim Sullivan. "I doubt
thot much rock come down. An' thot's not sayin' anythin' ag'in yer
powder, lad," he went on to Tom.

"Oh, that's all right," Tom Swift replied, with a laugh.  "My explosive
doesn't work by sound. It has lots of power, but it doesn't produce
much concussion."

"We've often made more noise with our blasts," confirmed Job Titus,
"but I can't say much for our results."

They were all anxious, Tom included, to hurry into the tunnel to see
how much rock had been loosened by the blast, but it was not safe to
venture in until the fumes had been allowed to disperse. In about an
hour, however, Tim Sullivan, venturing part way in, sniffed the air and
called:

"It's all right, byes! Air's clear. Now come on!"

They all hurried eagerly into the shaft, Mr. Damon stumbling along at
Tom's side, as anxious as the lad himself. Before they reached the face
of the cliff against which the bore had been driven, and which was as a
solid wall of rock to further progress, they began to tread on
fragments of stone.

"Well, it blew some as far back as here," said Walter Titus. "That's a
good sign."

"I hope so," Tom remarked.

There were still some fumes noticeable in the tunnel, and Mr. Damon
complained of a slight feeling of illness, while Koku, who kept at
Tom's side, murmured that it made his eyes smart. But the sensations
soon passed.

They came to a stop as the face of the cliff loomed into view in the
glare of a searchlight which Job Titus switched on. Then a murmur of
wonder came from every one, save from Tom Swift. He, modestly, kept
silent.

"Bless my breakfast orange!" cried Mr. Damon. "What a big hole!"

There was a great gash blown in the hard rock which had acted as a bar
to the further progress of the tunnel. A great heap of rock, broken
into small fragments, was on the floor of the shaft, and there was a
big hole filled with debris which would have to be removed before the
extent of the blast could be seen.

"That's doing the work!" cried Job Titus.

"It beats any two blasts we ever set off," declared his brother.

"Much fine!" muttered the Peruvian foreman, Serato.

"It's a lalapaloosa, lad!  Thot's what it is!" enthusiastically
exclaimed Tim Sullivan. "Now the black beggars will have some rock to
shovel! Come on there, Serato, git yer lazy imps t' work cartin' this
stuff away.  We've got a man on th' job now in this new powder of Tom
Swift's. Git busy!"

"Um!" grunted the Indian, and he called to his men who were soon busy
with picks and shovels, loading the loosened rock and earth into the
mule-hauled dump cars which took it to the mouth of the tunnel, whence
it was shunted off on another small railroad to fill in a big gulch to
save bridging it.

Tom's first blast was very successful, and enough rock was loosed to
keep the laborers busy for a week. The contractors were more than
satisfied.

"At this rate we'll finish ahead of time, and earn a premium," said Job
to his brother.

"That's right. You didn't make any mistake in appealing to Tom Swift.
But I wonder if Blakeson & Grinder have given up trying to get the job
away from us?"

"I don't know. I'd never trust them. We must watch out for Waddington.
That bomb on the vessel had a funny look, even if it was not meant to
kill Tom or me. I won't relax any."

"No, I guess it wouldn't be safe."

But a week went by without any manifestation having been made by the
rival tunnel contractors. During that week more of Tom's explosive
arrived, and he busied himself getting ready another blast which could
be set off as soon as the debris from the first should have been
cleared away.

Meanwhile, Professor Bumper, with his Indian guides and helpers, had
made several trips into the mountain regions about Rimac, but each time
that he returned to the tunnel camp to renew his supplies, he had only
a story of failure to recite.

"But I am positive that somewhere in this vicinity is the lost Peruvian
city of Pelone," he said. "Every indication points to this as the
region, and the more I study the plates of gold, and read their
message, the more I am convinced that this is the place spoken of.

"But we have been over many mountains, and in more valleys, without
finding a trace of the ancient civilization I feel sure once flourished
here. There are no relics of a lost race--not so much as an arrow or
spear head. But, somehow or other, I feel that I shall find the lost
city.  And when I do I shall be famous!"

"Mr. Damon and I will help you all we can," Tom said. "As soon as I get
ready the next blast I'll have a little time to myself, and we will go
with you on a trip or two."

"I shall be very glad to have you," the bald-headed scientist remarked.

Tom's second blast was even more successful than the first, and enough
of the hard rock was loosed and pulverized to give the Indian laborers
ten days' work in removing it from the tunnel.

Then, as the services of the young inventor would not be needed for a
week or more, he decided to go on a little trip with Professor Bumper.

"I'll come too," said Mr. Damon. "One of the sub-contractors whose men
are gathering the cinchona bark for our firm has his headquarters in
the region where you are going, and I can go over there and see why he
isn't up to the mark."

Accordingly, preparations having been made to spend a week in camp in
the forests of the Andes, Tom and his party set off one morning.
Professor Bumper's Indian helpers would do the hard work, and, of
course, Koku, who went wherever Tom went, would be on hand in case some
feat of strength were needed.

It was a blind search, this hunt for a lost city, and as much luck
might be expected going in one direction as in another; so the party
had no fixed point toward which to travel. Only Mr. Damon stipulated
that he wanted to reach a certain village, and they planned to include
that on their route.

Tom Swift took his electric rifle with him, and with it he was able to
bring down a couple of deer which formed a welcome addition to the camp
fare.

The rifle was a source of great wonder to the Peruvians.  They were
familiar with ordinary firearms, and some of them possessed
old-fashioned guns. But Tom's electric weapon, which made not a sound,
but killed with the swiftness of light, was awesome to them. The
interpreter accompanying Professor Bumper confided privately to Tom
that the other Indians regarded the young inventor as a devil who
could, if he wished, slay by the mere winking of an eye.

Mr. Damon located the quinine-gathering force he was anxious to see,
and, through the interpreter, told the chief that more bark must be
brought in to keep up to the terms of the contract.

But something seemed to be the matter. The Indian chief was indifferent
to the interpreted demands of Mr. Damon, and that gentleman, though he
blessed any number of animate and inanimate objects, seemed to make no
impression.

"No got men to gather bark, him say," translated the interpreter.

"Hasn't got any men!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "Why, look at all the lazy
beggars around the village."

This was true enough, for there were any number of able-bodied Indians
lolling in the shade.

"Him say him no got," repeated the translator, doggedly.

At that moment screams arose back of one the grass huts, and a child
ran out into the open, followed by a savage dog which was snapping at
the little one's bare legs.

"Bless my rat trap!" gasped Mr. Damon. "A mad dog!"

Shouts and cries arose from among the Indians. Women screamed, and
those who had children gathered them up in their arms to run to
shelter. The men threw all sorts of missiles at the infuriated animal,
but seemed afraid to approach it to knock it over with a club, or to go
to the relief of the frightened child which was now only a few feet
ahead of the animal, running in a circle.

"Me git him!" cried Koku, jumping forward.

"No,  Wait!" exclaimed Tom Swift. "You can kill the dog all right,
Koku," he said, "but a scratch from his tooth might be fatal. I'll fix
him!"

Snatching his electric rifle from the Indian bearer who carried it, Tom
took quick aim. There was no flash, no report and no puff of smoke, but
the dog suddenly crumpled up in a heap, and, with a dying yelp, rolled
to one side.  The child was saved.

The little one, aware that something had happened, turned and saw the
stretched out form of its enemy. Then, sobbing and crying, it ran
toward its mother who had just heard the news.

While the mothers gathered about the child, and while the older boys
and girls made a ring at a respectful distance from the dog, there was
activity noticed among the men of the village. They began hurrying out
along the forest paths.

"Where are they going?" asked Tom. "Is there some trouble?  Was that a
sacred dog, and did I get in bad by killing it?"

The interpreter and the native chief conversed rapidly for a moment and
then the former, turning to Tom, said:

"Men go git cinchona bark now. Plenty get for him," and he pointed to
Mr. Damon. "They no like stay in village. T'ink yo' got lightning in
yo' pocket," and he pointed to the electric rifle.

"Oh, I see!" laughed Tom. "They think I'm a sort of wizard. Well, so I
am. Tell them if they don't get lots of quinine bark I'll have to stay
here until all the mad dogs are shot."

The interpreter translated, and when the chief had ceased replying, Tom
and the others were told:

"Plenty bark git. Plenty much. Yo' go away with yo' lightning. All
right now."

"Well, it's a good thing I keeled over that dog," Tom said. "It was the
best object lesson I could give them."

And from then on there was no more trouble in this district about
getting a supply of the medicinal bark.

A week passed and Professor Bumper was no nearer finding the lost city
than he had been at first. Reluctantly, he returned to the tunnel camp
to get more provisions.

"And then I'll start out again," he said.

"We'll go with you some other time," promised Tom. "But now I expect
I'll have to get another blast ready."

He found the debris brought down by the second one all removed, and in
a few days, preparations for exploding more of the powder were under
way.

Many holes had been drilled in the face of the cliff of hard rock, and
the charges tamped in. Electric wires connected them, and they were run
out to the tunnel mouth where the switch was located.

This was done late one afternoon, and it was planned to set off the
blast at the close of the working day, to allow all night for the fumes
to be blown away by the current of air in the tunnel.

"Get the men out, Tim," said Tom, when all was ready.

"All right, sor," was the answer, and the Irish foreman went back
toward the far end of the bore to tell the last shift of laborers to
come out so the blast could be set off.

But in a little while Tim came running back with a queer look on his
face.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom. "Why didn't you bring the men with you?"

"Because, sor, they're not there!"

"Not in the tunnel? Why, they were working there a little while ago,
when I made the last connection!"

"I know they were, but they've disappeared."

"Disappeared?"

"Yis sir. There's no way out except at this end an' you didn't see thim
come out: did you?"

"Then they've disappeared! That's all there is to it! Bad goin's on,
thot's what it is, sor! Bad!" and Tim shook his head mournfully.




Chapter XV

Frightened Indians


"There must be some mistake," said Tom, wondering if the Irish foreman
were given to joking. Yet he did not seem that kind of man.

"Mistake? How can there be a mistake, sor? I wint in there to tell th'
black imps t' come out, but they're not there to tell!"

"What's the trouble?" asked Job Titus, coming out of the office near
the tunnel mouth. "What's wrong, Tom?"

"Why, I sent Tim in to tell the men to come out, as I was going to set
off a blast, but he says the men aren't in there. And I'm sure the last
shift hasn't come out."

By this time Koku, Mr. Damon and Walter Titus had come up to find out
what the trouble was.

"The min have disappeared--that's all there is to it!" Tim said.

"Perhaps they have missed their way--the lights may have gone out, and
they might have wandered into some abandoned cutting," suggested Tom.

"There aren't any abandoned cuttin's," declared Tim. "It's a straight
bore, not a shaft of any kind. I've looked everywhere, and th' min
aren't there I tell ye!"

"Are the lights going?" asked Job. "You might have missed them in the
dark, Tim."

"The lights are going all right, Mr. Titus," said the young man in
charge of the electrical arrangements. "The dynamo hasn't been stopped
to-day."

"Come on, we'll have a look," proposed Walter Titus.  "There must be
some mistake. Hold back the blast, Tom."

"All right," and the young inventor disconnected the electrical
detonating switch. "I'll come along and have a look too," he added.
"Don't let anybody meddle with the wires, Jack," he said to the young
Englishman who was in charge of the dynamo.

Into the dimly-lit tunnel advanced the party of investigators, with Tim
Sullivan in the lead.

"Not a man could I find!" he said, murmuring to himself.  "Not a man!
An' I mind th' time in Oireland whin th' little people made vanish a
whole village like this, jist bekase ould Mike Maguire uprooted a bed
of shamrocks."

"That's enough of your superstitions, Tim," warned Job Titus. "If some
of the other Indians hear you go on this way they'll desert as they did
once before."

"Did they do that?" asked Tom.

"Yes, we had trouble that way when we first began the work. The place
here was a howling wilderness then, and there were lots of pumas around.

"A puma is a small sized lion, you know, not specially dangerous unless
cornered. Well, some of the men had their families here with them, and
a couple of children disappeared. The story got started that there was
a big puma--the king of them all--carrying off the little ones, and my
brother and I awoke one morning to find every laborer missing. They
departed bag and baggage. Afraid of the pumas."

"What did you do?"

"Well, we organized ourselves and our white helpers into a hunting
party and killed a lot of the beasts. There wasn't any big one though."

"And what had become of the children?"

"They weren't eaten at all. They had wandered off into the woods, and
some natives found them and took care of them.  Eventually, they got
back home. But it was a long while before we could persuade the Indians
to come back. Since then we haven't had any trouble, and I don't want
Tim, with his superstitious fancies, to start any."

"But the min are gone!" insisted the Irish foreman, who had listened to
this story as he and the others walked along.

"We'll find them," declared Mr. Titus.

But though they looked all along the big shaft, and though the place
was well lighted by extra lamps that were turned on when the
investigation started, no trace could be found of the workmen, who had
been left in the tunnel to finish tamping the blast charges. The party
reached the rocky heading, in the face of which the powerful explosive
had been placed, and not an Indian was in sight. Nor, as far as could
be told, was there any side niche, or blind shaft, in which they could
be hiding.

Sometimes, when small blasts were set off, the men would go behind a
projecting shoulder of rock to wait until the charge had been fired,
but now none was in such a refuge.

"It is queer," admitted Walter Titus. "Where can the men have gone?"

"That's what I want to know!" exclaimed Tim.

"Are you sure they didn't come out the mouth of the tunnel?" asked Job
Titus.

"Positive," asserted Tom. I was there all the while, rigging up the
fires."

"We'll call the roll, and check up," decided Job Titus.  "Get Serato to
help."

The Indian foreman had not been in the tunnel with the last shift of
men, having left them to Tim Sullivan to get out in time. The Indian
foreman was called from his supper in the shack where he had his
headquarters, and the roll of workmen was called.

Ten men were missing, and when this fact became known there were uneasy
looks among the others.

"Well," said Mr. Titus, after a pause. "The men are either in the
tunnel or out of it. If they're in we don't dare set off the blast, and
if they're out they'll show up, sooner or later, for supper. I never
knew any of 'em to miss a meal."

"If such a thing were possible," said Walter Titus, "I would say that
our rivals had a hand in this, and had induced our men to bolt in order
to cripple our force. But we haven't seen any of Blakeson & Grinder's
emissaries about, and, if they were, how could they get the ten men out
of the tunnel without our seeing them? It's impossible!"

"Well, what did happen then?" asked Tom.

"I'm inclined to think that the men came out and neither you, nor any
one else, saw them. They ran away for reasons of their own. We'll take
another look in the morning, and then set off the blast."

And this was done. There being no trace of the men in the tunnel it was
deemed safe to explode the charges. This was done, a great amount of
rock being loosened.

The laborers hung back when the orders were given to go in and clean
up. There were mutterings among them.

"What's the matter?" asked Job Titus.

"Them afraid," answered Serato. "Them say devil in tunnel eat um up! No
go in."

"They won't go in, eh?" cried Tim Sullivan. "Well, they will thot! If
there's a divil inside there's a worse one outside, an' thot's me! Git
in there now, ye black-livered spalapeens!" and catching up a big club
the Irishman made a rush for the hesitating laborers. With a howl they
rushed into the tunnel, and were soon loading rock into the dump cars.




Chapter XVI

On the Watch


The mystery of the disappearance of the ten men--for mystery it
was--remained, and as no side opening or passage could be found within
the tunnel, it came to be the generally accepted explanation that the
laborers had come out unobserved, and, for reasons of their own, had
run away.

This habit on the part of the Peruvian workers was not unusual. In
fact, the Titus brothers had to maintain a sort of permanent employment
agency in Lima to replace the deserters. But they were used to this.
The difference was that the Indians used to vanish from camp at night,
and invariably after pay-day.

"And that's the only reason I have a slight doubt that they walked out
of the tunnel," said Job Titus. "There was money due em."

"They never came out of the front entrance of the tunnel," said Tom.
"Of that I'm positive."

But there was no way of proving his assertion.

The third blast, while not as successful as the second in the amount of
rock loosened, was better than the first, and made a big advance in the
tunnel progress. Tom was beginning to understand the nature of the
mountain into which the big shaft was being driven and he learned how
better to apply the force of his explosive.

That was the work which he had charge of--the placing of the giant
powder so it would do the most effective work.  Then, when the fumes
from the blast had cleared away, in would surge the workmen to clear
away the debris.

Under the direction of Mr. Swift, left at Shopton to oversee the
manufacture of the explosive, new shipments came on promptly to Lima,
and were brought out to the tunnel on the backs of mules, or in the
case of small quantities, on the llamas. But the latter brutes will not
carry a heavy load, lying down and refusing to get up if they are
overburdened, whereas one has yet to find a mule's limit.

After his first success in getting the natives to take a more active
interest in the gathering of the cinchona bark, Mr. Damon found it
rather easy, for the story of Tom's electric rifle and how it had
killed the mad dog spread among the tribes, and Mr. Damon had but to
announce that the "lightning shooter," as Tom was called, was a friend
of the drug concern to bring about the desired results. Mr. Damon, by
paying a sort of bribe, disguised under the name "tax," secured the
help of Peruvian officials so he had no trouble on that score.

Koku was in his element. He liked a wild life and Peru was much more
like the country of giants where Tom had found him, than any place the
big man had since visited. Koku had great strength and wanted to use
it, and after a week or so of idleness he persuaded Tom to let him go
in the tunnel to work.

The giant was made a sort of foreman under Tim, and the two became
great friends. The only trouble with Koku was that he would do a thing
himself instead of letting his men do it, as, of course, all proper
foremen should do. If the giant saw two or three of the Indians trying
to lift a big rock into the little dump cars, and failing because of
its great weight, he would good-naturedly thrust them aside, pick up
the big stone in his mighty arms, and deposit it in its place.

And once when an unusually big load had been put in a car, and the mule
attached found it impossible to pull it out to the tunnel mouth, Koku
unhitched the creature and, slipping the harness around his waist,
walked out, dragging the load as easily as if pulling a child on a sled.

Professor Bumper kept on with his search for the lost city of Pelone.
Back and forth he wandered among the wild Andes Mountains, now hopeful
that he was on the right trail, and again in despair. Tom and Mr. Damon
went with him once more for a week, and though they enjoyed the trip,
for the professor was a delightful companion, there were no results.
But the scientist would not give up.

Tom Swift was kept busy looking after the shipments of the explosive,
and arranging for the blasts. He had letters from Ned Newton in which
news of Shopton was given, and Mr. Swift wrote occasionally. But the
mails in the wilderness of the Andes were few and far between.

Tom wrote a letter of explanation to Mr. Nestor, in addition to the
wireless he had sent regarding the box labeled dynamite, but he got no
answer. Nor were his letters to Mary answered.

"I wonder what's wrong?" Tom mused. "It can't be that they think I did
that on purpose. And even if Mr. Nestor is angry at me for something
that wasn't my fault, Mary ought to write."

But she did not, and Tom grew a bit despondent as the days went by and
no word came.

"I suppose they might be offended because I left Rad to do up that
package instead of attending to it myself," thought Tom. "Well, I did
make a mistake there, but I didn't mean to. I never thought about
Eradicate's not reading. I'll make him go to night school as soon as I
get back. But maybe I'll never get another chance to send Mary
anything. If I do, I'll not let Rad deliver it--that's sure."

The feeling of alarm engendered among the Indians by the disappearance
of their ten fellow-workers seemed to have disappeared. There were
rumors that some of the mysterious ten had been seen in distant
villages and settlements, but the Titus brothers could not confirm this.

"I don't think anything serious happened to them, anyhow," said Job
Titus one day. "And I should hate to think our work was responsible for
harm to any one."

"Your rivals don't seem to be doing much to hamper you," observed Tom.
"I guess Waddington gave up.

"I won't be too sure of that," said Mr. Titus.

"Why, what has happened?" Tom asked.

"Well, nothing down here--that is, directly--but we are meeting with
trouble on the financial end. The Peruvian government is holding back
payments."

"Why is that?"

"They claim we are not as far advanced as we ought to be."

"Aren't you?"

"Practically, yes. There was no set limit of work to be done for the
intermediate payments. We bonded ourselves to have the tunnel done at a
certain date.

"If we fail, we lose a large sum, and if we get it done ahead of time
we get a big premium. There was no question as to completing a certain
amount of footage before we received certain payments. But Senor
Belasdo, the government representative, claims that we will not be done
in time, and therefore he is holding back money due us. I'm sure the
rival contractors have set him up to this, because he was always decent
to us before.

"Another matter, too, makes me suspicious. We have tried to raise money
in New York to tide us over while the government is holding up our
funds here. But our New York office is meeting with difficulties. They
report there is a story current to the effect that we are going to
fail, and while that isn't so, you know how hard it is to borrow money
in the face of such rumors. We are doing all we can to fight them, of
course, and maybe we'll beat out our rivals yet.

"But that isn't all. I'm sure some one is on the ground here trying to
make trouble among our workers. I never knew so many men to leave, one
after another. It's keeping the employment agency in Lima busy
supplying us with new workers. And so many of them are unskilled. They
aren't able to do half the work of the old men, and poor Tim Sullivan
is in despair."

"You think some one here is causing dissensions and desertions among
your men?"

"I'm sure of it! I've tried to ferret out who it is, but the spy, for
such he must be, keeps his identity well hidden."

Tom thought for a moment. Then he said:

"Mr. Titus, with your permission, I'll see if I can find out about this
for you."

"Find out what, Tom?"

"What is causing the men to leave. I don't believe it's the scare about
the ten missing ones."

"Nor do I. That's past and gone. But how are you going to get at the
bottom of it?"

"By keeping watch. I've got nothing to do now for the next week. We've
just set off a big blast, and I've got the powder for the following one
all ready. The men will be busy for some time getting out the broken
rock. Now what I propose to do is to go in the tunnel and work among
them until I can learn something.

"I can understand the language pretty well now, though I can't speak
much of it. I'll go in the tunnel every day and find out what's going
on."

"But you'll be known, and if one of our men, or one who we suppose is
one, turns out to be a spy, he'll be very cautious while you're in
there."

"He won't know me," Tom said. "This is how I'll work it.  I'll go off
with Professor Bumper the next time he starts on one of his weekly
expeditions into the woods. But I won't go far until I turn around and
come back. I'll adopt some sort of disguise, and I'll apply to you for
work. You can tell Tim to put me on. You might let him into the secret,
but no one else."

A few days later Tom was seen departing with Professor Bumper into the
interior, presumably to help look for the lost city. Mr. Damon was away
from camp on business connected with the drug concern, and Koku, to his
delight, had been given charge of a stationary hoisting engine outside
the tunnel, so he would not come in contact with Tom. It was not
thought wise to take the giant into the secret.

Then one day, shortly after Professor Bumper and Tom had disappeared
into the forest, a ragged and unkempt white man applied at the tunnel
camp for work. There was just the barest wink as he accosted Mr. Titus,
who winked in turn, and then the new man was handed over to Tim
Sullivan, as a sort of helper.

And so Tom Swift began his watch.




Chapter XVII

The Condor


Left to himself, with only the rather silent gang of Peruvian Indians
as company, Tom Swift looked about him.  There was not much active work
to be done, only to see that the Indians filled the dump cars evenly
full, so none of the broken rock would spill over the side and litter
the tramway. Then, too, he had to keep the Indians up to the mark
working, for these men were no different from any other, and they were
just as inclined to "loaf on the job" when the eye of the "boss" was
turned away.

They did not talk much, murmuring among themselves now and then, and
little of what they said was intelligible to Tom.  But he knew enough
of the language to give them orders, the main one of which was:

"Hurry up!"

Now, having seen to it that the gang of which he was in temporary
charge was busily engaged, Tom had a chance to look about him. The
tunnel was not new to him. Much of his time in the past month had been
spent in its black depths, illuminated, more or less, by the string of
incandescent lights.

"What I want to find," mused Tom, as he walked to and fro, "is the
place where those Indians disappeared. For I'm positive they got away
through some hole in this tunnel.  They never came out the main
entrance."

Tom held to this view in spite of the fact that nearly every one else
believed the contrary--that the men had left by the tunnel mouth, near
which Tom happened to be alone at the time.

Now, left to himself, with merely nominal duties, and so disguised that
none of the workmen would know him for the trim young inventor who
oversaw the preparing of the blast charges, Tom Swift walked to and
fro, looking for some carefully hidden passage or shaft by means of
which the men had got away.

"For it must be well hidden to have escaped observation so long," Tom
decided.  "And it must be a natural shaft, or hole, for we are boring
into native rock, and it isn't likely that these Indians ever tried to
make a tunnel here.  There must be some natural fissure communicating
with the outside of the mountain, in a place where no one would see the
men coming out."

But though Tom believed this it was another matter to demonstrate his
belief. In the intervals of seeing that the natives properly loaded the
dump cars, and removed as much of the debris as possible, Tom looked
carefully along the walls and roof of the tunnel thus far excavated.

There were cracks and fissures, it is true, but they were all
superficial ones, as Tom ascertained by poking a long pole up into them.

"No getting out that way," he said, as he met with failure after
failure.

Once, while thus engaged, he saw Serato, the Indian foreman looking
narrowly at him, and Serato said something in his own language which
Tom could not understand. But just then along came Tim Sullivan, who,
grasping the situation, exclaimed:

"Thot's all roight, now, Serri, me lad!" for thus he contracted the
Indian's name. "Thot's a new helper I have, a broth of a bye, an' yez
kin kape yer hands off him. He's takin' orders from me!"

"Um!" grunted the Indian. "Wha for he fish in tunnel roof?" for Tom's
pole was one like those the Indians used when, on off days, they
emulated Izaak Walton.

"Fishin' is it!" exclaimed Tim. "Begorra 'tis flyin' fish he's after
I'm thinkin'. Lave him alone though, Serri! I'm his boss!"

"Um!" grunted the Indian again, as he moved off into the farther
darkness.

"Be careful, Tom," whispered the Irishman, when the native had gone.
"These black imps is mighty suspicious. Maybe thot fellah had a hand in
th' disappearances hisself."

"Maybe," admitted Tom. "He may get a percentage on all new hands that
are hired."

Tom kept on with his search, always hoping he might find some hidden
means of getting out of the tunnel. But as the days went by, and he
discovered nothing, he began to despair.

"The queer thing about it," mused Tom, "is what has become of the ten
men. Even if they did find some secret means of leaving, what has
become of them? They couldn't completely disappear, and they have
families and relatives that would make some sort of fuss if they were
out of sight completely this long. I wonder if any inquiries have been
made about them?"

When Tom came off duty he asked the Titus brothers whether or not any
of the relatives of the missing men had come to seek news about them.
None had.

"Then," said Tom, "you can depend on it the men are all right, and
their relatives know it. I wonder how it would do to make inquiries at
that end? Question some of the relatives."

"Bless my hat band!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, who was at the conference. "I
never thought of that. I'll do it for you."

The odd man had gotten his quinine gathering business well under way
now, and he had some spare time. So, with an interpreter who could be
trusted, he went to the native village whence had come nearly all of
the ten missing men.  But though Mr. Damon found some of their
relatives, the latter, with shrugs of their shoulders, declared they
had seen nothing of the ones sought.

"And they didn't seem to worry much, either," reported Mr. Damon.

"Then we can depend on it," remarked Tom, "that the men are all right
and their relatives know it. There's some conspiracy here."

So it seemed. But who was at the bottom of it?

"I can't figure out where Blakeson & Grinder come in," said Job Titus.
"They would have an object in crippling us, but they seem to be working
from the financial end, trying to make us fail there. I haven't seen
any of their sneaking agents around here lately, and as for Waddington
he seems to have stayed up North."

Tom resumed his vigil in the tunnel, poking here and there, but with
little success. His week was about up, and he would soon have to resume
his character as powder expert, for the debris was nearly all cleaned
up, and another blast would have to be fired shortly.

"Well, I'm stumped!" Tom admitted, the day when he was to come on duty
for the last time as a pretended foreman. "I've hunted all over, and I
can't find any secret passage."

It was warm in the tunnel, and Tom, having seen one train of the dump
cars loaded, sat down to rest on an elevated ledge of rock, where he
had made a sort of easy chair for himself, with empty cement bags for
cushions.

The heat, his weariness and the monotonous clank-clank of a water pump
near by, and the equally monotonous thump of the lumps of rocks in the
cars made Tom drowsy. Almost before he knew it he was asleep.

What suddenly awakened him he could not tell. Perhaps it was some
influence on the brain cells, as when a vivid dream causes us to start
up from slumber, or it may have been a voice. For certainly Tom heard a
voice, he declared afterward.

As he roused up he found himself staring at the rocky wall of the
tunnel. And yet the wall seemed to have an opening in it and in the
opening, as if it were in the frame of a picture, appeared the face Tom
had seen at his library the day Job Titus called on him--the face of
Waddington!

Tom sat up so quickly that he hit his head sharply on a projecting rock
spur, and, for the moment he "saw stars." And with the appearance of
these twinkling points of light the face of Waddington seemed to fade
away, as might a vision in a dream.

"Bless my salt mackerel, as Mr. Damon would say!" cried Tom. "What have
I discovered?"

He rubbed his head where he had struck it, and then passed his hand
before his eyes, to make sure he was awake. But the vision, if vision
it was, had vanished, and he saw only the bare rock wall. However, the
echo of the voice remained in his ears, and, looking down toward the
tunnel floor Tom saw Serato, the Indian foreman.

"Were you speaking to me?" asked Tom, for the man understood and spoke
English fairly well.

"No, sar. I not know you there!" and the foreman seemed startled at
seeing Tom. Clearly he was in a fright.

"You were speaking!" insisted Tom.

"No, sar!" The man shook his head.

"To some one up there!" went on the young inventor, waving his hand
toward the spot where he had seen the face in the rock.

"Me speak to roof? No, sar!" Serato laughed.

Tom did not know what to believe.

"You hear me tell um lazy man to much hurry," the Indian went on. "Me
not know you sleep there, sar!"

"Oh, all right," Tom said, recollecting that he must keep up his
disguise. "Maybe I was dreaming."

"Yes, sar," and the foreman hurried on, with a backward glance over his
shoulder.

"Now was I dreaming or not?" thought Tom. "I'm going to have a look at
that place though, where I saw Waddington's face. Or did I imagine it?"

He got a long pole and a powerful flash lamp, and when he had a chance,
unobserved, he poked around in the vicinity where he had seen the face.

But there was only solid rock.

"It must have been a dream," Tom concluded. "I've been thinking too
much about this business. I'll have to give up.  I can't solve the
mystery of the missing men."

The next day, much disappointed, he resumed his own character as
explosive expert, and prepared for another blast. The net result of his
watch was that he became suspicious of Serato, and so informed the
Titus Brothers.

"Oh, but you're mistaken," said Job.  "We have had him for years, on
other contracts in Peru, and we trust him."

"Well, I don't," Tom said, but he had to let it go at that.

Another blast was set off, but it was not very successful.

"The rock seems to be getting harder the farther in we go," commented
Walter Titus. "We're not up to where we ought to be."

"I'll have to look into it," answered Tom. "I may have to change the
powder mixture. Guess I'll go up the mountain a way, and see if there
are any outcroppings of rock there that would give me an idea of what
lies underneath."

Accordingly, while the men in the tunnel were clearing away the rock
loosened by the blast, Tom, one day, taking his electric rifle with
him, went up the mountain under which the big bore ran.

He located, by computation, the spot beneath which the end of the
tunnel then was, and began collecting samples of the outcropping ledge.
He wanted to analyze these pieces of stone later. Koku was with him,
and, giving the giant a bag of stones to carry, Tom walked on rather
idly.

It was a wild and desolate region in which he found himself on the side
of the mountain. Beyond him stretched towering and snow-clad peaks, and
high in the air were small specks, which he knew to be condors,
watching with their eager eyes for their offal food.

As Tom and Koku made their way along the mountain trail they came
unexpectedly upon an Indian workman who was gathering herbs and bark,
an industry by which many of the natives added to their scanty
livelihood. The woman was familiar with the appearance of the white
men, and nodded in friendly fashion.

Tom passed on, thinking of many things, when he was suddenly startled
by a scream from the woman. It was a scream of such terror and agony
that, for the moment, Tom was stunned into inactivity. Then, as he
turned, he saw a great condor sweeping down out of the air, the wind
fairly whistling through the big, outstretched wings.

"Jove!" ejaculated Tom. "Can the bird be going to attack the woman?"

But this was not the object of the condor. It was aiming to strike,
with its fierce talons, at a point some paces distant from where the
woman stood, and in the intervals between her screams Tom heard her
cry, in her native tongue:

"My baby! My baby! The beast-bird will carry off my baby!"

Then Tom understood. The woman herb-gatherer had brought her infant
with her on her quest, and had laid it down on a bed of soft grass
while she worked. And it was this infant, wrapped as Tom afterward saw
in a piece of deer-skin, at which the condor was aiming.

"Master shoot!" cried Koku, pointing to the down-sweeping bird.

"You bet I'll shoot!" cried Tom.

Throwing his electric rifle to his shoulder, Tom pressed the switch
trigger. The unseen but powerful force shot straight at the condor.

The outstretched wings fell limp, the great body seemed to shrivel up,
and, with a crash, the bird fell into the underbrush, breaking the
twigs and branches with its weight.  The electric rifle, a full account
of which was given in the volume entitled "Tom Swift and His Electric
Rifle," had done its work well.

With a scream, in which was mingled a cry of thanks, the woman threw
herself on the sleeping child. The condor had fallen dead not three
paces from it.

Tom Swift had shot just in time.




Chapter XVIII

The Indian Strike


Snatching up in her arms the now awakened child, the woman gazed for a
moment into its face, which she covered with kisses. Then the
herb-gatherer looked over to the dead, limp body of the great condor,
and from thence to Tom.

In another moment the woman had rushed forward, and knelt at the feet
of the young inventor. Holding the baby in one arm, in her other hand
the woman seized Tom's and kissed it fervently, at the same time pouring
forth a torrent of impassioned language, of which Tom could only make
out a word now and then. But he gathered that the woman was thanking
him for having saved the child.

"Oh, that's all right," Tom said, rather embarrassed by the
hand-kissing. "It was an easy shot."

An Indian came bursting through the bushes, evidently the woman's
husband by the manner in which she greeted him, and Tom recognized the
newcomer as one of the tunnel workers.  There was some quick
conversation between the husband and wife, in which the latter made all
sorts of motions, including in their scope Tom, his rifle, the dead
condor and the now smiling baby.

The man took off his hat and approached Tom, genuflecting as he might
have done in church.

"She say you save baby from condor," the man said in his halting
English. "She t'ank you--me, I t'ank you. Bird see babe in deer
skin--t'ink um dead animal. Maybe so bird carry baby off, drop um on
sharp stone, baby smile no more. You have our lives, senor! We do
anyt'ing we can for you."

"Thanks," said Tom, easily. "I'm glad I happened to be around. I
supposed condors only went for things dead, but I reckon, as you say,
it mistook the baby in the deer skin for a dead animal. And I guess it
might have carried your little one off, or at least lifted it up, and
then it might have dropped it far enough to have killed it. It sure is
a big bird," and Tom strolled over to look at what he had bagged.

The condor of the Andes is the largest bird of prey in existence. One
in the Bronx Zoo, in New York, with his wings spread out, measured a
little short of ten feet from tip to tip. Measure ten feet out on the
ground and then imagine a bird with that wing stretch.

This same condor in the park was made angry by a boy throwing a feather
boa up into the air outside the cage. The condor raised himself from
the ground, and hurled himself against the heavy wire netting so that
the whole, big cage shook. And the breeze caused by the flapping wings
blew off the hats of several spectators. So powerful was the air force
from the condor's wings that it reminded one of the current caused when
standing behind the propellers of an aeroplane in motion. The condor
rarely attacks living persons or animals, though it has been known to
carry off big sheep when driven by hunger.

It was one of these animals Tom Swift had shot with his electric rifle.

"We do anyt'ing you want," the man gratefully repeated.

"Well, I've got about all I want," Tom said. "But if you could tell me
where those ten missing men are, and how they got out of the tunnel,
I'd be obliged to you."

The woman did not seem to comprehend Tom's talk, but the man did. He
started, and fear seemed to come over him.

"Me--I--I can not tell," he murmured.

"No, I don't suppose you can," said Tom, musingly. "Well, it doesn't
matter, I guess I'll have to cross it off my books. I'll never find
out."

Again the Indian and his wife expressed their gratitude, and Tom, after
letting the little brown baby cling to his finger, and patting its
chubby cheek, went on his way with Koku.

"Well, that was some excitement," mused Tom, who made little of the
shot itself, for the condor was such a mark that he would have had to
aim very badly indeed to miss it.  And perhaps only the electric rifle
could have killed quickly enough to prevent the baby's being injured in
some way by the big bird, even though it was dying.

"Master heap good shot!" exclaimed Koku, admiringly.

The tunnel work went on, though not so well as when Tom's explosive was
first used. The rock was indeed getting harder and was not so easily
shattered. Tom made tests of the pieces he had obtained from the
outcropping ledge on the mountain where he had shot the condor, and
decided to make a change in the powder.

Shipments were regularly received from Shopton, Mr. Swift keeping
things in progress there. Mr. Damon's business was going on
satisfactorily, and he lent what aid he could to Tom. As for Professor
Bumper he kept on with his search for the lost city of Pelone, but with
no success.

The scientist wanted Tom and Mr. Damon to go on another trip with him,
this time to a distant sierra, or fertile valley, where it was reported
a race of Indians lived, different from others in that region.

"It may be that they are descendants from the Pelonians," suggested the
professor. Tom was too busy to go, but Mr. Damon went. The expedition
had all sorts of trouble, losing its way and getting into a swamp from
which escape was not easy. Then, too, the strange Indians proved
hostile, and the professor and his party could not get nearer than the
boundaries of the valley.

"But the difficulties and the hostile attitude of these natives only
makes me surer that I am on the right track," said Mr. Bumper. "I shall
try again."

Tom was busy over a problem in explosives one day when he saw Tim
Sullivan hurrying into the office of the two brothers. The Irishman
seemed excited.

"I hope there hasn't been another premature blast," mused Tom. "But if
there had been I think I'd have heard it."

He hastened out to see Job and Walter Titus in excited conversation
with Tim.

"They didn't come out, an' thot's all there is to it," the foreman was
saying. "I sint thim in mesilf, and they worked until it was time t'
set off th' blast. I wint t' get th' fuse, an' I was goin' t' send th'
black imps out of danger, whin--whist--they was gone whin I got
back--fifteen of 'em this time!"

"Do you mean that fifteen more of our men have vanished as the first
ten did?" asked Job Titus.

"That's what I mean," asserted the Irishman.

"It can't be!" declared Walter.

"Look for yersilf!" returned Tim. "They're not in th' tunnel!"

"And they didn't come out?"

"Ask th' time-keeper," and Tim motioned to a young Englishman who,
since the other disappearance, had been stationed at the mouth of the
tunnel to keep a record of who went in and came out.

"No, sir! Nobody kime hout, sir!" the Englishman declared.  "Hi 'aven't
been away frim 'ere, sir, not since hi wint on duty, sir. An' no one
kime out, no, sir!"

"We've got to stop this!" declared Job Titus.

"I should say so!" agreed his brother.

With Tom and Tim the Titus brothers went into the tunnel.  It was
deserted, and not a trace of the men could be found.  Their tools were
where they had been dropped, but of the men not a sign.

"There must be some secret way out," declared Tom.

"Then we'll find it," asserted the brothers.

Work on the tunnel was stopped for a day, and, keeping out all natives,
the contractors, with Tom and such white men as they had in their
employ, went over every foot of roof, sides and floor in the big shaft.
But not a crack or fissure, large enough to permit the passage of a
child, much less a man, could be found.

"Well, I give up!" cried Walter Titus in despair. "There must be
witchcraft at work here!"

"Nonsense!" exclaimed his brother. "It's more likely the craft of
Blakeson & Grinder, with Waddington helping them."

"Well, if a human agency made these twenty-five men disappear, prove
it!" insisted Walter.

His brother did not know what to say.

"Well, go on with the work," was Job's final conclusion.  "We'll have
one of the white men constantly in the tunnel after this whenever a
gang is working. We won't leave the natives alone even long enough to
go to get a fuse. They'll be under constant supervision."

The tunnel was opened for work, but there were no workers.  The morning
after the investigation, when the starting whistle blew there was no
line of Indians ready to file into the big, black hole. The huts where
they slept were deserted. A strange silence brooded over the tunnel
camp.

"Where are the men, Serato?" asked Tom of the Indian foreman.

"Men um gone. No work any more. What you call a hit."

"You mean a strike?" asked Tom.

"Sure--strike--hit--all um same. No more work--um 'fraid!"




Chapter XIX

A Woman Tells


"Well, if this isn't the limit!" cried Tom Swift. "As if we didn't
have trouble enough without a strike on our hands!"

"I should say yes!" chimed in Job Titus.

"Do you mean that the men won't work any more?" asked his brother of
the native foreman.

"Sure, no more work--um much 'fraid big devil in tunnel carry um off
an' eat um."

"Well, I don't know that I blame 'em for being a bit frightened,"
commented Job. "It is a queer proceeding how twenty-five men can
disappear like that. Where have the men gone, Serato?"

"Gone home. No more work. Go on hit--strike--same like white men."

"They waited until pay day to go on strike," commented the bookkeeper,
a youth about Tom's age.

This was true. The men had been paid off the day before, and usually on
such occasions many of them remained away, celebrating in the nearest
village. But this time all had left, and evidently did not intend to
come back.

"We'll have to get a new gang," said Job. "And it's going to delay us
just at the wrong time. Well, there's no help for it. Get busy, Serato.
You and Tim go and see how many men you can gather. Tell them we'll
give them a sol a week more if they do good work. (A sol is the
standard silver coin of Peru, and is worth in United States gold about
fifty cents.)

"Half a dollar a day more will look mighty big to them," went on the
contractor. "Get the men, Serato, and we'll raise your wages two sols a
week."

The eyes of the Indian gleamed, and he went off, saying.

"Um try, but men much 'fraid."

Whether Serato used his best arguments could not, of course, be
learned, but he came back at the close of the day, unaccompanied by any
workers, and he shook his head despondently.

"Indians no come for one sol, mebby not for two," he said.  "I no can
git."

"Then I'll try!" cried Job. "I'll get the workers. I'll make our old
ones come back, for they'll be the best."

Accompanied by his brother and Tom he went to the various Indian
villages, including the one whence most of the men now on strike had
come. The fifteen missing ones were not found, though, as before, their
relatives, and, in some cases, their families, did not seem alarmed.
But the men who had gone on strike were found lolling about their
cabins and huts, smoking and taking their ease, and no amount of
persuasion could induce them to return.

Some of them said they had worked long enough and were tired, needing a
rest. Others declared they had money enough and did not want more. Even
two more sols a week would not induce them to return.

And many were frankly afraid. They said so, declaring that if they went
back to the tunnel some unknown devil might carry them off under the
earth.

Job Titus and his brother, who could speak the language fairly well,
tried to argue against this. They declared the tunnel was perfectly
safe. But one native worker, who had been the best in the gang, asked:

"Where um men go?"

The contractors could not answer.

"It's a trick," declared Walter. "Our rivals have induced the men to go
on strike in order to hamper us with the work so they'll get the job."

But the closest inquiry failed to prove this statement. If Blakeson &
Grinder, or any of their agents, had a hand in the strike they covered
their operations well. Though diligent inquiry was made, no trace of
Waddington, or any other tool, could be found.

Tom, who had some sort of suspicion of the bearded man on the steamer,
tried to find him, even taking a trip in to Lima, but without avail.

The tunnel work was at a standstill, for there was little use in
setting off blasts if there were no men to remove the resulting piles
of debris. So, though Tom was ready with some specially powerful
explosive, he could not use it.

Efforts were made to get laborers from another section of the country,
but without effect. The contractors heard of a big force of Italians
who had finished work on a railroad about a hundred miles away, and
they were offered places in the tunnel. But they would not come.

"Well, we may as well give up," said Walter, despondently, to his
brother one day. "We'll never get the tunnel done on time now."

"We still have a margin of safety," declared job. "If we could get the
men inside of a couple of weeks, and if Tom's new powder rips out more
rock, we'll finish in time."

"Yes, but there are too many ifs. We may as well admit we've failed."

"I'll never do that!"

"What will you do?"

But Job did not know.

"If we could git a gang of min from the ould sod--th' kind I used t'
work wit in N'Yark," said Tim Sullivan, "I'd show yez whot could be
done! We'd make th' rock fly!"

But that efficient labor was out of the question now. The tunnel camp
was a deserted place.

"Come on, Koku, we'll go hunting," said Tom one day.  "There's no use
hanging around here, and some venison wouldn't go bad on the table."

"I'll come, too," said Mr. Damon. "I haven't anything to do."

The Titus brothers had gone to a distant village, on the forlorn hope
of getting laborers, so Tom was left to his own devices, and he decided
to go hunting with his electric rifle.

The taruco, or native deer, had been plentiful in the vicinity of the
tunnel until the presence of so many men and the frequent blasts had
driven them farther off, and it was not until after a tramp of several
miles that Tom saw one.  Then, after stalking it a little way, he
managed to kill it with the electric rifle.

Koku hoisted the animal to his big shoulders, and, as this would
provide meat enough for some time, Tom started back for camp.

As he and Mr. Damon, with Koku in the rear, passed through a little
clearing, they saw, on the far side, a native hut.  And from it rushed
a woman, who approached Tom, casting herself on her knees, while she
pressed his free hand to her head.

"Bless my scarf pin!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "What does this mean, Tom?"

"Oh, this is the mother of the child I saved from the condor," said
Tom. "Every time she sees me she thanks me all over again. How is the
baby?" he asked in the Indian tongue, for he was a fair master of it by
now.

"The baby is well. Will the mighty hunter permit himself to enter my
miserable hovel and partake of some milk and cakes?"

"What do you say, Mr. Damon?" Tom asked. "She's clean and neat, and she
makes a drink of goat's milk that isn't bad.  She bakes some kind of
meal cakes that are good, too. I'm hungry."

"All right, Tom, I'll do as you say."

A little later they were partaking of a rude, but none the less
welcome, lunch in the woman's hut, while the baby whose life Tom had
saved cooed in the rough log cradle.

"Say, Masni," asked Tom, addressing the woman by name, "don't you know
where we can get some men to work the tunnel?" Of course Tom spoke the
Indian language, and he had to adapt himself to the comprehension of
Masni.

"Men no work tunnel?" she inquired.

"No, they've all skipped out--vamoosed. Afraid of some spirit."

The woman looked around, as though in fear. Then she approached Tom
closely and whispered:

"No spirit in tunnel--bad man!"

"What!" cried Tom, almost jumping off his stool. "What do you mean,
Masni?"

"Me tell mighty hunter," she went on, lowering her voice still more.
"My man he no want to tell, he 'fraid, but I tell. Mighty hunter save
Vashni," and she looked toward the baby. "Me help friends of mighty
hunter. Bad man in tunnel--no spirit!

"Men go. Spirit no take um--bad man take um."

"Where are they now?" asked Tom. "Jove, if I could find them the secret
would be solved!"

The woman looked fearfully around the hut and then whispered:

"You come--me show!"

"Bless my toothbrush!" cried Mr. Damon. "What is going to happen, Tom
Swift?"

"I don't know," was the answer, "but something sure is in the wind. I
guess I shot better than I knew when I killed that condor."




Chapter XX

Despair


Calling to a girl of about thirteen years to look after her baby, Masni
slipped along up a rough mountain trail, motioning to Tom, Mr. Damon
and Koku to follow. Or rather, the woman gave the sign to Tom, ignoring
the others, who, naturally, would not be left behind. Masni seemed to
have eyes for no one but the young inventor, and the manner in which
she looked at him showed the deep gratitude she felt toward him for
having saved her baby from the great condor.

"Come," she said, in her strange Indian tongue, which Tom could
interpret well enough for himself now.

"But where are we going, Masni?" he asked. "This isn't the way to the
tunnel."

"Me know. Not go to tunnel now," was her answer. "Me show you men."

"But which men do you mean, Masni?" inquired Tom. "The lost men, or the
bad ones, who are making trouble for us?  Which men do you mean?"

Masni only shook her head, and murmured: "Me show."

Probably Tom's attempt to talk her language was not sufficiently clear
to her.

"My man--he good man," she said, coming to a pause on the rough trail
after a climb which was not easy.

"Yes, I know he is," Tom said. "But he went on a strike with the
others, Masni. He no work. He go on a 'hit,' as Serato calls it," and
Tom laughed.

"My man he good man--but he 'fraid," said the wife. "He want to tell
you of bad mans, but he 'fraid. You save my baby, I no 'fraid. I tell."

"Oh, I see," said Tom. "Your husband would have given away the secret,
only he's afraid of the bad men. He likes me, too?"

"Sure!" Masni exclaimed. "He want tell, but 'fraid. He go 'way, I tell."

Tom was not quite sure what it all meant, but it seemed that after his
slaying of the condor both parents were so filled with gratitude that
they wanted to reveal some secret about the tunnel, only Masni's
husband was afraid. She, however, had been braver.

"Something is going to happen," said Tom Swift. "I feel it in my bones!"

"Bless my porous plaster!" cried Mr. Damon. "I hope it isn't anything
serious."

"We'll see," Tom went on.

They resumed their journey up the mountain trail. It wound in and out
in a region none of them had before visited.  Though it could not be
far from the tunnel, it was almost a strange country to Tom.

Suddenly Masni stopped in a narrow gorge where the walls of rock rose
high on either hand. She seemed looking for something. Her sharp, black
eyes scanned the cliff and then with an exclamation of satisfaction she
approached a certain place. With a quick motion she pulled aside a mass
of tangled vines, and disclosed a path leading down through a V shaped
crack in the cliff.

"Mans down there," she said. "You go look."

For a moment Tom hesitated. Was this a trap? If he and his friends
entered this narrow and dark opening might not the Indian woman roll
down some rock back of them, cutting off forever the way of escape?

Tom turned and looked at Masni. Then he was ashamed of his suspicion,
for the honest black face, smiling at him, showed no trace of guile.

"You go--you see lost men," the woman urged.

"Come on!" cried Tom. "I believe we're on the track of the mystery!"

He led the way, followed by Mr. Damon, while Koku came next and then
Masni. It could be no trap since she entered it herself.

The path widened, but not much. There was only room for one to walk at
a time. The trail twisted and turned, and Tom was wondering how far it
led, when, from behind him, came the cry of the woman:

"Watch now--no fall down."

Tom halted around a sharp turn, and stood transfixed at the sight which
met his gaze. He found himself looking out through a crack in the face
of a sheer stone cliff that went straight down for a hundred feet or
more to a green-carpeted valley.

Tom was standing in a narrow cleft of rock--the same rock through which
they had made their way. And at the foot of the cliff was a little
encampment of Indians. There were a dozen huts, and wandering about
them, or sitting in the shade, were a score or more of Indians.

"There men from tunnel," said Masni, and, as he looked, wondering, Tom
saw some of the workers he knew. One especially, was a laborer who
walked with a peculiar limp.

"The missing men!" gasped the young inventor.

"Bless my almanac!" cried Mr. Damon. "Where?"

"Here," answered Tom. "If you squeeze past me you can see them."

Mr. Damon did so.

"How did they get here?" asked the odd man, as he looked down in the
little valley where the missing ones were sequestered.

"That's what we've got to find out," Tom said. "At any rate here they
are, and they seem to be enjoying life while we've been worrying as to
what had become of them. How did they get here, Masni?"

"Me show you. Come."

"Wait until I take another look," said Tom.

"Be careful they don't see you," cautioned Mr. Damon.

"They can't very well. The cleft is screened by bushes."

Tom looked down once more on the group of men who had so mysteriously
disappeared. The little valley stretched out away from the face of the
cliff, through which, by means of the crack, or cleft in it, Tom and
the others had come. Tom looked down the wall of rock. It was as smooth
as the side of a building, and offered no means of getting down or up.
Doubtless there was an easier entrance to the valley on the other side.
It was like looking down into some vast hall through an upper window or
from a balcony.

"And those men have been in hiding, or been hidden here, ever since
they disappeared from the tunnel," said Mr. Damon.

"It doesn't look as though they were detained by force," Tom remarked.
"I think they are being paid to stay away. How did they get here,
Masni?"

"Me show you. Come!"

They went back along the trail that led through the split in the rock,
until they had come to the place where the natural curtain of vines
concealed the entrance. Tom took particular notice of this place so he
would know it again.

Then Masni led them over the mountain, and this time Tom saw that they
were approaching the tunnel. He recognized some places where he had
taken samples of rock from the outcropping to test the strength of his
explosive.

Reaching a certain wild and desolate place, Masni made a signal of
caution. She seemed to be listening intently.  Then, as if satisfied
there was no danger, she parted some bushes and glided in, motioning
the others to follow.

"Now I wonder what's up," Tom mused.

He and the others were soon informed.

Masni stopped in front of a pile of brush. With a few vigorous motions
of her arms she swept it aside and revealed a smooth slab of rock. In
the centre was what seemed to be a block of metal Masni placed her foot
on this and pressed heavily.

And those watching saw a strange thing.

The slab of rock tilted to one side, as if on a pivot, revealing a
square opening which seemed to lead through solid stone. And at the far
end of the opening Tom Swift saw a glimmer of light.

Stooping down, he looked through the hole thus strangely opened and
what he saw caused him to cry out in wonder.

"It's the tunnel!" he cried. "I can look right down into the tunnel.
It's the incandescent lights I see. I can look right at the ledge of
rock where I kept watch that day, and where I saw--where I saw the face
of Waddington!" he cried.  "It wasn't a dream after all. This is a
shaft connecting with the tunnel. We didn't discover it because this
rock fits right in the opening in the roof. It must have been there all
the while, and some blast brought it to light. Is this how the men got
out, or were taken out of the tunnel, Masni?" Tom asked.

"This how," said the Indian woman. "See, here rope!"

She pawed aside a mound of earth, and disclosed a rope buried there, a
rope knotted at intervals. This, let down through the hole in the roof
of the tunnel, provided a means of escape, and in such a manner that
the disappearance of the men was most mysterious.

"I see how it is!" cried Tom. "Some one interested, Waddington
probably, who knew about this old secret shaft going down into the
earth, used it as soon as our blasting was opened that far. They got
the men out this way, and hid them in the secret valley."

"But what for?" cried Mr. Damon.

"To cripple us! To cause the strike by making our other workers afraid
of some evil spirit! The men were taken away secretly, and, doubtless,
have been kept in idleness ever since--paid to stay away so the mystery
would be all the deeper. Our rivals finding they couldn't stop us in
any other way have taken our laborers away from us."

"Bless my meal ticket! It does look like that!" cried Mr. Damon.

"Of course that's the secret!" cried Tom. "Blakeson & Grinder, or some
of their tools--probably the bearded man or Waddington--found out about
this shaft which led down into our tunnel. They induced the first ten
men to quit, and when Tim went to get the fuse the rope was let down,
and the men climbed up here, one after the other. Those Indians can
climb like cats. Once the ten were out the shaft was closed with the
rock, and the ten men taken off to the valley to be secreted there.

"The same was done with the next fifteen, and, I suppose, if the strike
hadn't come, more of our workers would have been induced to leave in
this way. They're probably being better paid than when earning their
wages; and their relatives must know where they are, and also be given
a bonus to keep still. No wonder they didn't make a fuss.

"And no wonder we couldn't find any opening in the tunnel roof. This
rock must fit in as smoothly as a secret drawer in the kind of old desk
where missing wills are found in stories."

"You say you saw Waddington, or the bearded man?" asked Mr. Damon.

"At the time," replied Tom, "I thought it was a dream. Now I know it
wasn't. He must have opened the shaft just as I awakened from a doze.
He saw me and closed it again. He may have been getting ready then to
take off more of our men, so as to scare the others. Well, we've found
out the trick."

"And what are you going to do next?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Get those missing men back. That will break the hoodoo, and the others
will come back to work. Then we'll get on the trail of Waddington, or
Blakeson & Grinder, and put a stop to this business. We know their
secret now."

"You mean to get the men out of the secret valley, Tom?"

"Yes. There must be some other way into it than down the rock where we
were. How about it, Masni?" and he inquired as to the valley. The
Indian woman gave Tom to understand that there was another entrance.

"Well, close up this shaft now before some one sees us at it--the
bearded man, for example," Tom suggested. He took another look down
into the tunnel, which was now deserted on account of the strike, and
then Masni pressed on the mechanism that worked the stone. She showed
Tom how to do it.

"Just a counter-balanced rock operating on the same principle as does a
window," Tom explained, after a brief examination. "Probably some of
the old Indian tribes made this shaft for ceremonial purposes. They
never dreamed we would drive a tunnel along at the bottom of it. The
shaft probably opened into a cave, and one of our blasts made it part
of the tunnel. Well, this is part of the secret, anyhow. Much obliged
to you, Masni!"

The Indian woman had indeed revealed valuable information.  They
covered the secret rock with brush, as it had been, hid the rope and
came away. But Tom knew how to find the place again.

Events moved rapidly from then on. The Titus brothers were more than
astonished when Tom told them what he had learned.  Masni had told him
how to get into the secret valley by a round about, but easy trail, and
thither Tom, the contractors, Mr. Damon and some of the white tunnel
workers went the next day.

The sequestered men, taken completely by surprise, tried to bolt when
they saw that they were discovered, and then, shamefacedly enough,
admitted their part in the trick.

They would not, however, reveal who had helped them escape from the
tunnel. Threats and promises of rewards were alike unavailing, but Tom
and his employers knew well enough who it was. The tunnel workers
seemed rather tired of living in comparative luxury and idleness, and
agreed to come back to their labors.

They packed up their few belongings, mostly cooking pots and pans, and
marched out of the valley to the village at Rimac.

And so the strike was broken.

The reappearance of the missing men, in better health and spirits than
when they went away, acted like magic. The other men, who had missed
their wages, crowded back into the shaft, and the sounds of picks and
shovels were heard again in the tunnel.

Whether the missing ones told the real story, or whether they made up
some tale to account for their absence, Tom and his friends could not
learn. Nor did the bearded man (if he it were who had helped in the
plot), nor any representative of Blakeson & Grinder appear. The work on
the tunnel was resumed as if nothing had happened. But Tom arranged a
bright light so it would reflect on the spot in the roof where the
moving rock was, so that if the evil face of the bearded man, or of
Waddington, appeared there again, it would quickly be seen. A search of
the neighborhood, and diligent inquiries, failed to disclose the
presence of any of the plotters.

And then, as if Fate was not making it hard enough for the tunnel
contractors, they encountered more trouble. It was after Tom had set
off a big blast that Tim Sullivan, after inspecting what had happened,
came out to ask.

"I soy, Mr. Swift, why didn't yez use more powder?"

"More powder!" cried Tom. "Why, this is the most I have ever set off."

"Then somethin's wrong, sor. Fer there's only a little rock down. Come
an' see fer yersilf."

Tom hastened in. As the foreman had said, the effect of the blast was
small indeed. Only a little rock had been shaled off. Tom picked up
some of this and took it outside for examination.

"Why, it's harder than the hardest flint we've found yet," he said.
"The powder didn't make any impression on it at all. I'll have to use
terrific charges."

This was done, but with little better effect. The explosive, powerful
as it was, ate only a little way into the rock. Blast after blast had
the same poor effect.

"This won't do," said Job Titus, despairingly, one day.  "We aren't
making any progress at all. There's a half mile of this rock, according
to my calculations, and at this rate we'll be six months getting
through it. By that time our limit will be up, and we'll be forced to
give up the contract What can we do, Tom Swift?"




Chapter XXI

A New Explosive


The young inventor was idly handling some pieces of the very hard rock
that had cropped out in the tunnel cut. Tom had tested it, he had
pulverized it (as well as he was able), he had examined it under the
microscope, and he had taken great slabs of it and set off under it, or
on top of it, charges of explosive of various power to note the effect.
But the results had not been at all what he had hoped for.

"What's to be done, Tom?" repeated the contractor.

"Well, Mr. Titus," was the answer, "the only thing I see to do is to
make a new explosive."

"Can you do it, Tom?"

The reply was characteristic.

"I can try."

And in the days that followed, Tom began work on a new line. He had
brought from Shopton with him much of the needful apparatus, and he
found he could obtain in Lima what he lacked.

A message to his father brought the reply that the new ingredients Tom
needed would be shipped.

"The kind of explosive we need to rend that very hard rock," the young
inventor explained to the Titus brothers, "is one that works slowly."

"I thought all explosions had to be as quick as a flash," said Walter.

"Well, in a sense, they do. Yet we have quick burning and slow-burning
powders, the same as we have fuses. A quick-burning explosive is all
right in soft rock, or in soil with rock and earth mingled. But in rock
that is harder than flint if you use a quick explosive, only the outer
surface of the rock will be scaled off.

"If you take a hammer and bring it down with all your force on a hard
rock you may chip off a lot of little pieces, or you may crack the
rock, but you won't, under ordinary circumstances, pulverize it as we
want to do in the tunnel.

"On the other hand, if you take a smaller hammer, and keep tapping the
rock with comparatively gentle blows, you will set up a series of
vibrations, that, in time, will cause the hard rock to break up into
any number of small pieces.

"Now that is the kind of explosive I want--one that will deal a
succession of constant blows at the hard rock instead of one great big
blast."

"Can you make it, Tom?"

"Well, I don't know. I'll do the best I can."

From then on Tom was busy with his experiments.

Work on the tunnel did not cease while he was searching for a new
explosive. There was plenty of the old explosive left and charges of
this were set off as fast as holes could be drilled to receive it. But
comparatively little was accomplished. Sometimes more rock would be
loosed than at others, and the native laborers, now seemingly perfectly
contented, would be kept busy. Again, when a heavy blast would be set
off hardly a dozen dump cars could be filled.

But the work must go on. Already the time limit was getting perilously
close, and the contractors did not doubt that their rivals were only
waiting for a chance to step in and take their places.

Nothing more had been seen or heard of the bearded man, Waddington, or
Blakeson & Grinder. But that the rival firm had not given up was
evidenced by the efforts made in New York to cripple, financially, the
firm in which Tom was interested. In fact, at one time the Titus
brothers were so tied up that they could not get money enough to pay
their men. But Tom cabled his father, who was quite wealthy, and Mr.
Swift loaned the contractors enough to proceed with until they could
dispose of some securities.

It might be mentioned that Tom was to get a large sum if the tunnel
were completed on time, so it was to his interest and his father's, to
bring this about if he could.

Tom kept on with his powder experiments. Mr. Damon helped him, for that
gentleman had succeeded in putting the affairs of the wholesale drug
business on a firm foundation, and there was no more trouble about
getting the supplies of cinchona bark to market. The natives seemed to
have taken kindly to the eccentric man, or perhaps it was the
reputation of Tom Swift and his electric rifle that induced them to
work hard.

It must not be supposed that Professor Bumper was idle all this while.

He came and went at odd times, accompanied by his little retinue of
Indians, a guide and a native cook. He would come back to the tunnel
camp, where he made his headquarters, travel stained, worn and weary,
with disappointment showing on his face.

"No luck," he would report. "The hidden city of Pelone is still lost."

Then he would retire to his tent, to pour over his note-books, and make
a new translation of the inscription on the golden plates. In a day or
so, refreshed and rested, he would prepare for another start.

"I'll find it this time, surely!" he would exclaim, as he marched off
up the mountain trail. "I have heard of a new valley, never before
visited by a white man, in which there are some old ruins. I'm sure
they must be those of Pelone."

But in a week or so he would come back, worn out and discouraged again.

"The ruins were only those of a native village," he would say. "No
trace of an ancient civilization there."

The professor took little or no interest in the tunnel, though he
expressed the hope that Tom and his friends would be successful. But
industrial pursuits had no charm for the scientist. He only lived to
find the hidden city which was to make him famous.

He heard the story of the queer shaft leading down into the bore under
the mountain, and, for a time, hoped that might be some clue to the
lost Pelone. But, after an examination, he decided it was but the shaft
to some ancient mine which had not panned out, and so had been
abandoned after having been fitted with a balanced rocky door, perhaps
for some heathen religious rite.

There seemed to be no further trouble among the Indian tunnel workers.
Those who had disappeared--who had, seemingly, gone willingly up the
knotted rope to hide themselves in the valley--kept on with their work.
If they told their fellows why and where they had gone, the others gave
no sign. The evil spirits of the tunnel had been exorcised, and there
was now peace, save for the blasts that were set off every so often.

Tom tried combination after combination, testing them inside and
outside the tunnel, always seeking for an explosive that would give a
slow, rending effect instead of a quick blow, the power of which was
soon lost. And at last he announced:

"I think I have it!"

"Have you? Good!" cried Job Titus.

"Yes," Tom went on, "I've got a mixture here that seems to give just
the effect I want. I tried it on some small pieces of rock, and now I
want to test it on some large chunks.  Have you brought any down
lately?"

"Yes, we have some big slabs in there."

Some large pieces of the hard rock, which had been brought down in a
recent blast, were taken outside the tunnel, and in them one afternoon
Tom placed, in holes drilled to receive it, some of his new explosive.
The rocks were set some distance away from the tunnel camp, and Tom
attached the electric wires that were to detonate the charge.

"Well, I guess we're ready," announced the young inventor, as he looked
about him.

The tunnel workers had been allowed to go for the day, and in a log
shack, where they would be safe from flying pieces of rock, were Tom,
Mr. Damon and the two Titus brothers.

Tom held the electric switch in his hand, and was about to press it.

"This explosive works differently from any other," he explained. "When
the charge is fired there is not instantly a detonation and a bursting.
The powder burns slowly and generates an immense amount of gas. It is
this gas, accumulating in the cracks and crevices of the rock, that I
hope will burst and disintegrate it. Of course, an explosion eventually
follows, as you will see. Here she goes!"

Tom pressed the switch and, as he did so, there was a cry of alarm from
Mr. Damon.

"Bless my safety match, Tom!" cried the old man. "Look!  Koku!"

For, as the charge was fired, the giant emerged from the woods and
calmly took a seat on the rock that was about to be broken up into
fragments by Tom's new explosive.




Chapter XXII

The Fight


"Get off there, Koku!"

"Stand up!"

"Run!"

"Get out of the way! That's going up!"

Thus cried Tom and his friends to the big, good-natured, but somewhat
stupid, giant who had sat down in the dangerous spot. Koku looked
toward the hut, in front of which the young inventor and the others
stood, waving their hands to him and shouting.

"Get up! Get up!" cried Tom, frantically. The powder is going off,
Koku!"

"Can't you stop it?" asked Job Titus.

"No!" answered Tom. "The electric current has already ignited the
charge. Only that it's slow-burning it would have been fired long ago.
Get up, Koku!"

But the giant did not seem to understand. He waved his hand in friendly
greeting to Tom and the others, who dared not approach closer to warn
him, for the explosion would occur any second now.

Then Mr. Damon had an inspiration.

"Call him to come to you, Tom!" shouted the odd man. "He always comes
to you in a hurry, you know. Call him!"

Tom acted on the suggestion at once.

"Here, Koku!" he cried. "Come here, I want you! Kelos!"

This last was a word in the giant's own language, meaning "hurry." And
Koku knew when Tom used that word that there was need of haste. So,
though he had sat down, evidently to take his ease after a long tramp
through the woods, Koku sprang up to obey his master's bidding.

And, as he did so, something happened. The first spark from the fuse,
ignited by the electric current, had reached the slow-burning powder.
There was a crackle of flame, and a dull rumble. Koku sprang up from
the big stone as though shot. What he saw and heard must have alarmed
him, for he gave a mighty jump and started to run, at the same time
shouting:

"Me come, Master!"

"You'd better!" cried the young inventor.

Koku got away only just in time, for when he was half way between the
group of his friends and the big rock, the utmost force of the
explosion was felt. It was not so very loud, but the power of it made
the earth tremble.

The rock seemed to heave itself into the air, and when it settled back
it was seen to be broken up into many pieces.  Koku looked back over
his shoulder and gave another tremendous leap, which carried him out of
the way of the flying fragments, some of which rattled on the roof of
the log hut.

"There!" cried Tom. "I guess something happened that time!  The rock is
broken up finer than any like it we tried to shatter before. I think
I've got the mixture just right!"

"Bless my handkerchief!" cried Mr. Damon. "Think of what might have
happened to Koku if he had been sitting there."

"Well," said Tom, "he might not have been killed, for he would probably
have been tossed well out of the way at the first slow explosion, but
afterward--well, he might have been pretty well shaken up. He got away
just in time."

The giant looked thoughtfully back toward the place of the experimental
blast.

"Master, him do that?" he asked.

"I did," Tom replied. "But I didn't think you'd walk out of the woods,
just at the wrong time, and sit down on that rock."

"Um," murmured the giant. "Koku--he--he--Oh, by golly!" he yelled. And
then, as if realizing what he had escaped, and being incapable of
expressing it, the giant with a yell ran into the tunnel and stayed
there for some time.

The experiment was pronounced a great success and, now that Tom had
discovered the right kind of explosive to rend the very hard rock, he
proceeded to have it made in sufficiently large quantities to be used
in the tunnel.

"We'll have to hustle," said Job Titus. "We haven't much of our
contract time left, and I have reason to believe the Peruvian
government will not give any extension. It is to their interest to have
us fail, for they will profit by all the work we have done, even if
they have to pay our rivals a higher price than we contracted for. It
is our firm that will pocket the loss."

"Well, we'll try not to have that happen," said Tom, with a smile.

"If you're going to use bigger charges of this new explosive, Tom,
won't more rock be brought down?" asked Walter Titus.

"That's what I hope."

"Then we'll need more laborers to bring it out of the tunnel."

"Yes, we could use more I guess. The faster the blasted rock is
removed, the quicker I can put in new charges."

"I'll get more men," decided the contractor. "There won't be any
trouble now that the hoodoo of the missing workers is solved. I'll tell
Serato to scare up all his dusky brethren he can find, and we'll offer
a bonus for good work."

The Indian foreman readily agreed to get more laborers.

"And get some big ones, Serato," urged Job Titus. "Get some fellows
like Koku," for the giant did the work of three men in the tunnel, not
because he was obliged to, but because his enormous strength must find
an outlet in action.

"Um want mans like him?" asked the Indian, nodding toward the giant. He
and Koku were not on good terms, for once, when Koku was a hurry, he
had picked up the Indian (no mean sized man himself) and had calmly set
him to one side.  Serato never forgave that.

"Sure, get all the giants you can," Tom said. "But I guess there aren't
any in Peru."

Where Serato found his man, no one knew, and the foreman would not
tell; but a day or so later he appeared at the tunnel camp with an
Indian so large in size that he made the others look like pygmies, and
many of them were above the average in height, too.

"Say, he's a whopper all right!" exclaimed Tom. "But he isn't as big or
as strong as Koku."

"He comes pretty near it," said Job Titus. "With a dozen like him we'd
finish the tunnel on time, thanks to your explosive."

Lamos, the Indian giant, was not quite as large as Koku.  That is, he
was not as tall, but he was broader of shoulder.  And as to the
strength of the two, well, it was destined to be tried out in a
startling fashion.

In about a week Tom was ready with his first charges of the new
explosive. The extra Indians were on hand, including Lamos, and great
hopes of fast progress were held by the contractors.

The charge was fired and a great mass of broken rock brought down
inside the tunnel.

"That's tearing it up!" cried Job Titus, when the fumes had blown away,
the secret shaft having been opened to facilitate this. "A few more
shots like that and we'll be through the strata of hard rock."

The Indians, Koku and Lamos doing their share of the work, were rushed
in to clear away the debris, so another charge might be fired as soon
as possible. This would be in a day or so. The contract time was
getting uncomfortably close.

Blast after blast was set off, and good progress was made.  But instead
of half a mile of the extra hard rock the contractors found it would be
nearer three quarters.

"It's going to be touch and go, whether or not we finish on time," said
Mr. Job Titus one afternoon, when a clearance had been made and the men
had filed out to give the drillers a chance to make holes for a new
blast.

Tom was about to make a remark when Tim Sullivan came running out of
the tunnel, his face showing fright and wonder.

"What's up now, I wonder," said Mr. Titus. "More men missing?"

"Quick! Come quick!" cried the Irishman. "Thim two giants is fightin'
in there, an' they'll tear th' tunnel apart if we don't stop 'em. It's
an awful fight! Awful!"




Chapter XXIII

A Great Blast


Hardly comprehending what the Irish foreman had said, Tom Swift, the
Titus brothers and Mr. Damon followed Tim Sullivan back into the
tunnel. They had not gone far before they heard the murmur of many
voices, and mingled with that were roarings like those of wild beasts.

"That's thim!" cried Tim. "They're chawin' each other up!"

"Koku and that Indian giant fighting!" cried Tom. "What's it all about?"

"Don't ask me!" shouted Tim. "They've been on bad terms iver since they
met." This was true enough, for one giant was jealous of the other's
power, and they were continually trying feats of strength against one
another. Probably this had culminated in a fight, Tom concluded.

"And it will be some fight!" mused the young inventor.

Hurrying on, Tom and his companions came upon a strange and not
altogether pleasant sight. In an open place in the tunnel, where the
lights were brightest, and in front of the rocky wall which offered a
bar to further progress and which was soon to be blasted away,
struggled the two giants.

With their arms locked about one another, they swayed this way and
that--a struggle between two Titans. Of nearly the same height and
bigness, it was a wrestling match such as had never been seen before.
Had it been merely a friendly test of strength it would have been good
to look upon. But it needed only a glance into the faces of either
giant to show that it was a struggle in deadly earnest.

Back and forth they reeled over the rocky floor of the tunnel, bones
and sinews cracking. One sought to throw the other, and first, as Koku
would gain a slight advantage, his friends would call encouragement,
while, when Lamos seemed about to triumph, the Indians favoring him
would let out a yell of triumph.

For a few minutes Tom and his friends watched, fascinated.  Then they
saw Koku slip, while Lamos bent him farther toward the earth. The
Indian giant raised his big fist, and Tom saw in it a rock, which the
big man was about to bring down on Koku's head.

"Look out, Koku!" yelled Tom.

Tom's giant slid to one side only just in time, for the blow descended,
catching him on his muscular shoulder where it only raised a bruise.
And then Koku gathered himself for a mighty effort. His face flamed
with rage at the unfair trick.

"Bless my bath sponge!" cried Mr. Damon. "This is awful!"

"They must stop!" said Job Titus. "We can't have them fighting like
this. It is bad for the others. If it were in fun it would be all
right, but they are in deadly earnest.  They must stop!"

"Koku, stop!" called Tom. "You must not fight any more!"

"No fight more!" gasped the giant, through his clenched teeth. "This
end fight!"

With a mighty effort he broke the hold of Lamos' arms.  Then stooping
suddenly he seized his rival about the middle, and with a tremendous
heave, in which his muscles stood out in great bunches while his very
bones seemed to crack, Koku raised Lamos high in the air. Up over his
head he raised that mass of muscle, bone and flesh, squirming and
wriggling, trying in vain to save itself.

Up and up Koku raised Lamos as the murmur of those watching grew to a
shout of amazement and terror. Never had the like been seen in that
land for generations. Up and up one giant raised the other. Then
calling out something in his native tongue Koku hurled the other from
him, clear across the tunnel and up against the opposite rocky wall.
The murmuring died to frightened whispers as Lamos fell in a shapeless
heap on the floor.

"Ah!" breathed Koku, stretching himself, and extending his brawny arms.
"Fight all over, Master."

"Yes, so it seems, Koku," said Tom, solemnly, "but you have killed him.
Shame on you!" and he spoke bitterly.

Job Titus had hurried over to the fallen giant.

"He isn't dead," he called, "but I guess he won't wrestle or fight any
more. He's badly crippled."

"And him no more try to blow up tunnel, either," said Koku in his
hoarse voice. "Me fix: him! No more him take powder, and make tunnel
all bust."

"What do you mean, Koku?" asked Tom. "Is that why you fought him? Did
he try to wreck the tunnel?"

"So him done, Master. But Koku see--Koku stop. Then um fight."

"Be jabbers an' I wouldn't wonder but what he was right!" cried Tim
Sullivan, excitedly. "I did see that beggar." and he pointed to Lamos,
who was slowly crawling away, "at the chist where I kape th' powder,
but I thought nothin' of it at th' time. What did he try t' do, Koku?"

Then the giant explained in his own language, Tom Swift translating,
for Koku spoke English but indifferently well.

"Koku says," rendered Tom, "that he saw Lamos trying to put a big
charge of powder up in the place where the balanced rock fits in the
secret opening of the tunnel roof.  The charge was all ready to fire,
and if the giant had set it off he might have brought down the roof of
the tunnel and so choked it up that we'd have been months cleaning it
out.  Koku saw him and stopped him, and then the fight began. We only
saw the end."

"Bless my shoe string!" gasped Mr. Damon. "And a terrible end it was.
Will Lamos die?"

"I don't think so," answered Job Titus. "But he will be a cripple for
life. Not only would he have wrecked the tunnel, but he would have
killed many of our men had he set off that blast. Koku saved them,
though it seems too bad he had to fight to do it."

An investigation showed that Koku spoke truly. The charge, all ready to
set off, was found where he had knocked it from the hand of Lamos. And
so Tom's giant saved the day. Lamos was sent back to his own village, a
broken and humbled giant. And to this day, in that part of Peru, the
great struggle between Koku and Lamos is spoken of with awe where
Indians gather about their council fires, and they tell their children
of the Titanic fight.

"It was part of the plot," said Job Titus when the usual blast had been
set off that day, with not very good results.  "This giant was sent to
us by our rivals. They wanted him to hamper our work, for they see we
have a chance to finish on time. I think that foreman, Serato, is in
the plot. He brought Lamos here. We'll fire him!"

This was done, though the Indian protested his innocence.  But he could
not be trusted.

"We can't take any chances," said Job Titus. "Our time is too nearly
up. In fact I'm afraid we won't finish on time as it is. There is too
much of that hard rock to cut through."

"There's only one thing to do," said Tom, after an investigation. "As
you say, there is more of that hard rock than we calculated on. To try
to blast and take it out in the ordinary way will be useless. We must
try desperate means."

"What is that?" asked Walter Titus.

"We must set off the biggest blast we can with safety.  We'll bore a
lot of extra holes, and put in double charges of the explosive. I'll
add some ingredients to it that will make it stronger. It's our last
chance. Either we'll blow the tunnel all to pieces, or we'll loosen
enough rock to make sufficient progress so we can finish on time. What
do you say? Shall we take the chance?"

The Titus brothers looked at one another. Failure stared them in the
face. Unless they completed the tunnel very soon they would lose all
the money they had sunk in it.

"Take the chance!" exclaimed Job. "It's sink or swim anyhow. Set off
the big blast, Tom."

"All right. We'll get ready for it as soon as we can."

That day preparations were made for setting off a great charge of the
powerful explosive. The work was hurried as fast as was consistent with
safety, but even then progress was rather slow. Precautions had to be
taken, and the guards about the tunnel were doubled. For it was feared
that some word of what was about to be done would reach the rival firm,
who might try desperate means to prevent the completion of the work.

There was plenty of the explosive on hand, for Mr. Swift had sent Tom a
large shipment. All this while no word had come from Mr. Nestor, and
Tom was beginning to think that his prospective father-in-law was very
angry with him. Nor had Mary written.

Professor Bumper came and went as he pleased, but his quest was
regarded as hopeless now. Tom and his friends had little time for the
bald-headed scientist, for they were too much interested in the success
of the big blast.

"Well, we'll set her off to-morrow," Tom said one night, after a hard
day's work. "The rocky wall is honeycombed with explosive. If all goes
well we ought to bring down enough rock to keep the gangs busy night
and day."

Everything was in readiness. What would the morrow bring--success or
failure?




Chapter XXIV

The Hidden City


Gathered beyond the mouth of the tunnel, far enough away so that the
wind of the great blast would not bowl them over like ten pins, stood
Tom Swift and his friends. In his hand Tom held the battery box, the
setting of the switch in which would complete the electrical circuit
and set off the hundreds of pounds of explosive buried deep in the hard
rock.

"Are all the men out?" asked the young inventor of Tim Sullivan, who
had charge of this important matter. Tim was in sole charge as foreman
now, having picked up enough of the Indian language to get along
without an interpreter.

"All out, sor," Tim responded. "Yez kin fire whin ready, Mr. Swift."

It was a portentous moment. No wonder Tom Swift hesitated.  In a sense
he and his friends, the contractors, had staked their all on a single
throw. If this blast failed it was not likely that another would
succeed, even if there should be time to prepare one.

The time limit had almost expired, and there was still a half mile of
hard rock between the last heading and the farther end of the big
tunnel. If the blast succeeded enough rock might be brought down to
enable the work to go on, by using a night and day shift of men. Then,
too, there was the chance that the hard strata of rock would come to an
end and softer stone, or easily-dug dirt, be encountered.

"Well, we may as well have it over with," said Tom in a low voice.
Every one was very quiet--tensely quiet.

The young inventor looked up to see Professor Bumper observing him.

"Why, Professor!" Tom exclaimed, "I thought you had gone off to the
mountains again, looking for the lost city."

"I am going, Tom, very soon. I thought I would stop and see the effect
of your big blast. This is my last trip. If I do not find the hidden
city of Pelone this time, I am going to give up."

"Give up!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my fountain pen!"

"Oh, not altogether," went on the bald-headed scientist.  "I mean I
will give up searching in this part of Peru, and go elsewhere. But I
will never completely give up the search, for I am sure the hidden city
exists somewhere under these mountains," and he looked off toward the
snow-covered peaks of the Andes.

Tom looked at the battery box. He drew a long breath, and said:

"Here she goes!"

There was a contraction of his hand as he pressed the switch over, and
then, for perhaps a half second, nothing happened. Just for an instant
Tom feared something had gone wrong that the electric current had
failed, or that the wires had become disconnected--perhaps through some
action of the plotting rivals.

And then, gently at first, but with increasing intensity, the solid
ground on which they were all standing seemed to rock and sway, to
heave itself up, and then sink down.

"Bless my--" began Mr. Damon, but he got no further, for a mighty gust
of wind swept out of the tunnel, and blew off his hat. That gust was
but a gentle breeze, though, compared to what followed. For there came
such a rush of air that it almost blew over those standing near the
opening of the great shaft driven under the mountain. There was a roar
as of Niagara, a howling as in the Cave of the Winds, and they all bent
to the blast.

Then followed a dull, rumbling roar, not as loud as might have been
expected, but awful in its intensity. Deep down under the very
foundations of the earth it seemed to rumble.

"Run! Run back!" cried Tom Swift. "There's a back-draft and the powder
gas is poisonous. Stoop down and run back!"

They understood what he meant. The vapor from the powder was deadly if
breathed in a confined space. Even in the open it gave one a terrible
headache. And Tom could see floating out of the tunnel the first wisps
of smoke from the fired explosive. It was lighter than air, and would
rise. Hence the necessity, as in a smoke-filled room, of keeping low
down where the air is purer.

They all rushed back, stooping low. Mr. Damon stumbled and fell, but
Koku picked him up and, tucking him under one arm, as he might have
done a child, the giant followed Tom to a place of safety.

"Well, Tom, it went off all right," said Mr. Job Titus, as they stood
among the shacks of the workmen and watched the smoke pouring out of
the tunnel mouth.

"Yes, it went off. But did it do the work? That's what we've got to
find out."

They waited impatiently for the deadly vapor to clear out of the
tunnel. It was more than an hour before they dared venture in, and then
it was with smarting eyes and puckered throats. But the atmosphere was
quickly clearing.

"Switch on the lights," cried Tom to Tim, for the illuminating current
had been cut off when the blast was fired. "Let's see what we've
brought down."

Following the eager young inventor came the contractors, some of the
white workers, Mr. Damon and Professor Bumper.  The little scientist
said he would like to see the effect of the big blast.

Along they stumbled over pieces of rock, large and small.

"Some force to it," observed Job Titus, as he observed pieces of rock
close to the mouth of the tunnel. "If it only exerted the force the
other way, against the face of the rock, as well as back this way,
we'll be all right."

"The greater force was in the opposite direction," Tom said.

A big search-light had been got ready to flash on the place where the
blast had been set off. This was to enable them to see how much rock
had been torn away. And, as they reached the place where the flint-like
wall had been, they saw a strange sight.

"Bless my strawberry short-cake!" gasped Mr. Damon. "What a hole!"

"It is a hole," admitted Tom, in a low voice. "A bigger hole than I
dared hope for."

For a great cave, seemingly, had been blown in the face of the rock
wall that had hindered the progress of the tunnel.  A great black void
confronted them.

"Shift the light over this way," called Tom to Walter Titus, who was
operating it. "I can't see anything."

The great beam of light flashed into the void, and then a murmur of awe
came from every throat.

For there, revealed in the powerful electrical rays, was what seemed to
be a long tunnel, high and wide, as smooth as a paved street. And on
either side of it were what appeared to be buildings, some low, others
taller. And, branching off from the main tunnel, or street, were other
passages, also lined with buildings, some of which had crumbled to
ruins.

"Bless my dictionary!" cried Mr. Damon. "What is it?"

Professor Bumper had crawled forward over the mass of broken rock. He
gazed as if fascinated at what the searchlight showed, and then he
cried:

"I have found it! I have found it! The hidden city of Pelone!"




Chapter XXV

Success


Had it not been for Tom Swift, the excited professor would have rushed
pellmell over the jagged pile of rocks into the great cave which had
been opened by the blast, the cave in which the scientist declared was
the lost city for which he had been searching. But the young inventor
grasped Mr. Bumper by the arm.

"Better wait a bit," Tom suggested. "There may be powder gas in there.
Some of it must have blown forward."

"I don't care!" excitedly cried the professor. "That is the hidden
city! I'm sure of it! I have found it at last! I must go in and examine
it!"

"There'll be plenty of time," said Tom. "It isn't going to run away.
Wait until I make a test Tim, hand me one of those torches."

Some torches of a very inflammable wood were used to test for the
presence of the deadly smoke-gas. Lighting one of these, Tom tossed it
into the big excavation.

It fell to the stone floor--to the stone street to be more exact--and,
flaring up brightly, further revealed the rows of houses as they stood,
silent and uninhabited.

"It's all right," Tom announced. "There's no danger so long as the
torch burns. You can go on, Professor."

And Professor Bumper rushed forward, scrambling over the pile of
blasted rock, followed by Tom and the others. Some of the debris from
the explosion had fallen into the cave, and was scattered for some
distance along the main street of what had been Pelone. But beyond that
the way was clear.

"Yes, it is Pelone," cried Professor Bumper. "See!"

He pointed to inscriptions in queer characters over the doorway of some
of the houses, but he alone could read them.

"I have found Pelone!" he kept repeating over and over again.

And that is just what had happened. That last great blast Tom Swift had
set off had broken down the rock wall that hid the lost city from view.
There it was, buried deep down under the mountain, where it had been
covered from sight ages ago by some mighty earthquake or landslide;
perhaps both. And the earth and rocks had fallen over the main portion
of the city of Pelone in such a way--in such an arch formation--that
the greater part of it was preserved from the pressure of the mountain
above it.

The outlying portions were crushed into dust by the awful pressure of
the mountain--millions of tons of stone--but where the natural arch had
formed the weight was kept off the buildings, most of which were as
perfect as they had been before the cataclysm came.

The buildings were of stone block construction, mostly only one story
in height, though some were two. They were simply made, somewhat after
the fashion of the Aztecs. A look into some of them by the light of
portable electric lamps showed that the houses were furnished with some
degree of taste and luxury. There were traces of an ancient
civilization.

But of the inhabitants, there was not a trace: either they had fled
before the earthquake or the volcanic eruption had engulfed the city,
or the countless centuries had turned their very bones to dust.

"Oh, what a find! What a find!" murmured Professor Bumper.  "I shall be
famous! And so will you, Tom Swift. For it was your blast that revealed
the lost city of Pelone. Your name will be honored by every
archeological society in the world, and all will be eager to make you
an honorary member."

"That's all very nice," said Tom, "but what pleases me better is that
this tunnel is a success."

"Success!" cried Mr. Damon. "I should call it a failure, Tom Swift.
Why, you've run smack into an old city, and you'll have either to curve
the tunnel to one side, or start a new one."

"Nothing of the sort!" laughed Tom. "Don't you see? The tunnel comes
right up to the main street of Pelone. And the street is as straight as
a die, and just the width and height of the tunnel. All we will have to
do will be to keep on blasting away, where the main street comes to an
end, and our tunnel will be finished.  The street is over half a mile
long, I should judge, and we'll save all that blasting. The tunnel will
be finished in time!"

"So it will!" cried Job Titus. "We can use the main street of the
hidden city as part of the tunnel."

"Use the street all you like," said Mr. Bumper, "but leave the houses
to me. They are a perfect mine of ancient lore and information. At last
I have found it! The ancient, hidden city of Pelone, spoken of on the
Peruvian tablets, of gold."

The story of the discoveries the scientist made in Pelone is an
enthralling one. But this is a story of Tom Swift and his big tunnel,
and no place for telling of the archeological discoveries.

Suffice it to say that Professor Bumper, though he found no gold, for
which the contractors hoped, made many curious finds in the ancient
houses. He came upon traces of a strange civilization, though he could
find no record of what had caused the burial of Pelone beneath the
mountains. He wrote many books about his discovery, giving Tom Swift
due credit for uncovering the place with the mighty blast. Other
scientists came in flocks, and for a time Pelone was almost as busy a
place as it had been originally.

Even when the tunnel was completed and trains ran through it, the
scientists kept on with their work of classifying what they found. An
underground station was built on the main street of the old city, and
visitors often wandered through the ancient houses, wherein was the
bone-dust of the dead and gone people.

But to go back to the story of Tom Swift. Tom's surmise was right. He
and the contractors were able to use the main street of Pelone as part
of their tunnel, and a good half mile of blasting through solid rock
was saved. The flint came to an end at the extremity of Pelone, and the
last part of the tunnel had only to be dug through sand-stone and soft
dirt, an easy undertaking.

So the big bore was finished on time--ahead of time in fact, and Titus
Brothers received from Senor Belasdo, the Peruvian representative, a
large bonus of money, in which Tom Swift shared.

"So our rivals didn't balk us after all," said Walter Titus, "though
they tried mighty hard."

The big tunnel was finished--at least Tom Swift's work on it. All that
remained to do was to clear away the debris and lay the connecting
rails. Tom and Mr. Damon prepared to go back home. The latter's work
was done. As for Professor Bumper, nothing could take him from Pelone.
He said he was going to live there, and, practically, he did.

Tom, Koku and Mr. Damon returned to Lima, thence to go to Callao to
take the steamer for San Francisco. One day the manager of the hotel
spoke to them.

"You are Americans, are you not?" he asked.

"Yes," answered Tom. "Why?"

"Because there is another American here. He is friendless and alone,
and he is dying. He has no friends, he says.  Perhaps--"

"Of course we'll do what we can for him," said Tom, impulsively. "Where
is he?"

With Mr. Damon he entered the room where the dying man lay. He had
caught a fever, the hotel manager said, and could not recover. Tom,
catching sight of the sufferer, cried:

"The bearded man! Waddington!"

He had recognized the mysterious person who had been on the Bellaconda,
and the man whose face had stared at him through the secret shaft of
the tunnel.

"Yes, the 'bearded man' now," said the sufferer in a hoarse voice, "and
some one else too. You are right. I am Waddington!"

And so it proved. He had grown a beard to disguise himself so he might
better follow Tom Swift and Mr. Titus. And he had followed them,
seeking to prevent the completion of the tunnel. But he had not been
successful.

Waddington it was who had thrown the bomb, though he declared he only
hoped to disable Tom and Mr. Titus, and not to injure them. He was
fighting for delay. And it was Waddington, working in conjunction with
the rascally foreman Serato, who had induced the tunnel workers to
desert so mysteriously, hoping to scare the other Indians away. He
nearly succeeded too, had it not been for the gratitude of the woman
whose baby Tom had saved from the condor.

Waddington had been an actor before he became involved with the rival
contractors. He was smooth shaven when first he went to Shopton, to spy
on Mr. Titus, whose movements he had been commanded to follow by
Blakeson & Grinder. Then he disappeared after Mr. Titus chased him,
only to reappear, in disguise, on board the Bellaconda, as Senor Pinto.

Waddington, meanwhile, had grown a beard and this, with his knowledge
of theatrical makeup, enabled him to deceive even Mr. Titus. Of course
it was comparatively easy to deceive Tom, who had not known him.
Waddington had really been ill when he called for help on the ship, and
he had not noticed that it was Tom and Mr. Titus who came into his
stateroom to his aid. When he did recognize them, he relied on his
disguise to screen him from recognition, and he was successful. He had
only pretended to be ill, though, the time he slipped out and threw the
bomb.

Reaching Peru he at once began his plotting. Serato told him about the
secret shaft leading into the tunnel, and with the knotted rope, and
with the aid of the faithless foreman, the men were got out of the
tunnel and paid to hide away.  Waddington was planning further
disappearances when Tom saw him, but thought it a dream.

Masni, the Indian woman, out herb-hunting one day, had seen Waddington,
'the bearded man' as he then was--working the secret stone. Hidden, she
observed him and told her husband, who was afraid to reveal what he
knew. But when Tom saved the baby the woman rewarded him in the only
way possible. And it was Serato, who, at Waddington's suggestion,
caused the "hit" among the men by working on their superstitious fears.

Waddington, knowing that he was dying, confessed everything, and begged
forgiveness from Tom and his friends, which was granted, in as much as
no real harm had been done.  Waddington was but a tool in the hands of
the rival contractors, who deserted him in his hour of need. His last
hours, however, were made as comfortable as possible by the generosity
of Tom and Mr. Damon.

No effort was made to bring Blakeson & Grinder to justice, as there was
no evidence against them after Waddington died.  And, as the tunnel was
finished, the Titus brothers had no further cause for worry.

"But if it had not been for Tom's big blast, and the discovery of the
hidden city of Pelone just in the right place, we might be digging at
that tunnel yet," said Job Titus.

The day before the steamer was to sail, Tom Swift received a cable
message. Its receipt seemed to fill him with delight, so that Mr. Damon
asked:

"Is it from your father, Tom?"

"No it's from Mary Nestor. She says her father has forgiven me. They
have been away, and Mary has been ill, which accounts for no letters up
to now. But everything is all right now, and they feel that the
dynamite trick wasn't my fault. But, all the same, I'm going to teach
Eradicate to read," concluded Tom.

"I think it would be a good idea," agreed Mr. Damon.

Tom, Mr. Damon and Koku, bidding farewell to the friends they had made
in Peru, went aboard the steamer, Job Titus and his brother coming to
see them off.

"Give us an option on all that explosive you make, Tom Swift!" begged
Walter Titus. "We were so successful with this tunnel, thanks to you,
that the government is going to have us dig another.  Will you come
down and help?"

"Maybe," said Tom, with a smile. "But I'm going home first," and once
more he read the message from Mary Nestor.

And as Tom, on the deck of the steamer, waved his hands to Professor
Bumper and his other friends whom he was leaving in Peru, we also, will
say farewell.

========================================
========================================

TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER

or

Seeking the Platinum Treasure


By

VICTOR APPLETON



CONTENTS

     I  A Breakdown
    II  A Daring Project
   III  The Hand of the Czar
    IV  The Search
     V  A Clew from Russia
    VI  Rescuing Mr. Petrofsky
   VII  The Air Glider
  VIII  In a Great Gale
    IX  The Spies
     X  Off in the Airship
    XI  A Storm at Sea
   XII  An Accident
  XIII  Seeking a Quarrel
   XIV  Hurried Flight
    XV  Pursued
   XVI  The Nihilists
  XVII  On to Siberia
 XVIII  In a Russian Prison
   XIX  Lost in a Salt Mine
    XX  The Escape
   XXI  The Rescue
  XXII  In the Hurricane
 XXIII  The Lost Mine
  XXIV  The Leaking Tanks
   XXV  Homeward Bound--Conclusion





TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER




CHAPTER I

A BREAKDOWN


"Well, Ned, are you ready?"

"Oh, I suppose so, Tom. As ready as I ever shall be."

"Why, Ned Newton, you're not getting afraid; are you? And after you've
been on so many trips with me?"

"No, it isn't exactly that, Tom. I'd go in a minute if you didn't have
this new fangled thing on your airship. But how do you know how it's
going to work--or whether it will work at all? We may come a cropper."

"Bless my insurance policy!" exclaimed a man who was standing near the
two lads who were conversing. "You'd better keep near the ground, Tom."

"Oh, that's all right, Mr. Damon," answered Tom Swift. "There isn't any
more danger than there ever was, but I guess Ned is nervous since our
trip to the underground city of gold."

"I am not!" indignantly exclaimed the other lad, with a look at the
young inventor. "But you know yourself, Tom, that putting this new
propeller on your airship, changing the wing tips, and re-gearing the
motor has made an altogether different sort of a craft of it. You,
yourself, said it wasn't as reliable as before, even though it does go
faster."

"Now look here, Ned!" burst out Tom. "That was last week that I said it
wasn't reliable. It is now, for I've tried it out several times, and
yet, when I ask you to take a trip with me, to act as ballast--"

"Is that all you want me for, Tom, to act as ballast? Then you'd better
take a bag of sand--or Mr. Damon here!"

"Me? I guess not! Bless my diamond ring! My wife hasn't forgiven me for
going off on that last trip with you, Tom, and I'm not going to take
any more right away. But I don't blame Ned--"

"Say, look here!" cried Tom, a little out of patience, "you know me
better than that, Ned. Of course you're more than ballast--I want you to
help me manage the craft since I made the changes on her. Now if you
don't want to come, why say so, and I'll get Eradicate. I don't believe
he'll be afraid, even if he--"

"Hold on dar now, Massa Tom!" exclaimed an aged colored man, who was an
all around helper at the Swift homestead, "was yo' referencin' t' me
when yo' spoke?"

"Yes, Rad, I was saying that if Ned wouldn't go up in the airship with
me you would."

"Well, now, Masa Tom, I shorely would laik t' 'blige yo', I shore
would.  But de fack ob de mattah am dat I has a mos' particular job ob
white washin' t' do dish mornin', an' I 'spects I'd better be gittin'
at it.  It's a mos' particular job, an', only fo' dat, I'd be mos'
pleased t' go up in de airship. But as it am, I mus' ax yo' t' 'scuse
me, I really mus'," and the colored man shuffled off at a faster gait
than he was in the habit of using.

"Well, of all things!" gasped Tom. "I believe you're all afraid of the
old airship, just because I made some changes in her. I'll go up alone,
that's what I will."

"No, I'll go with you," interposed Ned Newton who was Tom's most
particular chum. "I only wanted to be sure it was all right, that was
all."

"Well, if you've fully made up your mind," went on the young inventor,
a little mollified, "lend me a hand to get her in shape for a run. I
expect to make faster time than I ever did before, and I'm going to
head out Waterford way. You'd better come along, Mr. Damon, and I'll
drop you off at your house."

"Bless my feather bed!" gasped the man. "Drop me off! I like that, Tom
Swift!"

"Oh, I didn't mean it exactly that way," laughed Tom. "But will you
come."

"No, thanks, I'm going home by trolley," and then as the odd man went
in the house to speak to Tom's father, the two lads busied themselves
about the airship.

This was a large aeroplane, one of the largest Tom Swift had ever
constructed, and he was a lad who had invented many kinds of machinery
besides crafts for navigating the upper regions. It was not as large as
his combined aeroplane and dirigible balloon of which I have told you
in other books, but it was of sufficient size to carry three persons
besides other weight.

Tom had built it some years before, and it had seemed good enough then.
Later he constructed some of different models, besides the big
combination affair, and he had gone on several trips in that.

He and his chum Ned, together with Eradicate Sampson, the colored man,
and Mr. Damon, had been to a wonderful underground city of gold in
Mexico, and it was soon after their return from this perilous trip that
Tom had begun the work of changing his old aeroplane into a speedier
craft.

This had occupied him most of the Winter, and now that Spring had come
he had a chance to try what a re-built motor, changed propellers, and
different wing tips would do for the machine.

The time had come for the test and, as we have seen, Tom had some
difficulty in persuading anyone to go along with him! But Ned finally
got over his feeling of nervousness.

"Understand, Tom," spoke Ned, "it isn't because I don't think you know
how to work an aeroplane that I hesitated. I've been up in the air with
you enough times to know that you're there with the goods, but I don't
believe even you know what this machine is going to do."

"I can pretty nearly tell. I'm sure my theory is right."

"I don't doubt that. But will it work out in practice?"

"She may not make all the speed I hope she will, and I may not be able
to push her high into the air quicker than I used to before I made the
changes," admitted Tom, "but I'm sure of one thing. She'll fly, and she
won't come down until I'm ready to let her. So you needn't worry about
getting hurt."

"All right--if you say so. Now what do you want me to do, Tom?"

"Go over the wire guys and stays for the first thing. There's going to
be lots of vibration, with the re-built motor, and I want everything
tight."

"Aye, aye, sir!" answered Ned with a laugh.

Then he set at his task, tightening the small nuts, and screwing up the
turn-buckles, while Tom busied himself over the motor. There was some
small trouble with the carburetor that needed eliminating before it
would feed properly.

"How about the tires?" asked Ned, when he had finished the wires.

"You might pump them up. There, the motor is all right. I'm going to
try it now, while you attend to the tires."

Ned had pumped up one of the rubber circlets of the small bicycle
wheels on which the aeroplane rested, and was beginning on the second,
when a noise like a battery of machine guns going off next to his ear
startled him so that he jumped, tripped over a stone and went down, the
air pump thumping him in the back.

"What in the world happened, Tom?" he yelled, for he had to use all his
lung power to be heard above that racket. "Did it explode?"

"Explode nothing!" shouted Tom. "That's the re-built motor in action."

"In action! I should say it was in action. Is it always going to roar
like that?"

Indeed the motor was roaring away, spitting fire and burnt gases from
the exhaust pipe, and enveloping the aeroplane in a whitish haze of
choking smoke.

No, I have the muffler cut out, and that's why she barks so. But she
runs easier that way, and I want to get her smoothed out a bit.

"Whew! That smoke!" gasped his chum. "Why don't you--whew--this is more
than I can stand," and holding his hands to his smarting eyes, Ned,
gasping and choking, staggered away to where the air was better.

"It is sort of thick," admitted Tom. "But that's only because she's
getting too much oil. She'll clear in a few minutes. Stick around and
we'll go up."

Despite the choking vapor, the young inventor stuck to his task of
regulating the motor, and in a short while the smoke became less, while
the big propeller blades whirled about more evenly. Then Tom adjusted
the muffler, and most of the noise stopped.

"Come on back, and finish pumping up the tires," he shouted to Ned.
"I'm going to stop her now, and then I'll give her the pressure test,
and we'll take a trip."

Having cleared his eyes of smoke, Ned came back to his task, and this
having been finished, Tom attached a heavy spring balance, or scales,
to the rope that held the airship back from moving when her propellers
were whirling about.

"How much pressure do you want?" asked Ned.

"I ought to get above twelve hundred with the way the motor is geared,
but I'll go up with ten. Watch the needle for me."

It may be explained that when aeroplanes are tested on the earth the
propellers are set in motion. This of course would send a craft
whizzing over the ground, eventually to rise in the air, but for the
fact that a rope, attached to the craft, and to some stationary object,
holds it back.

Now if this rope is hooked to a spring balance, which in turn is made
fast to the stationary object, the "thrust" of the propellers will be
registered in pounds on the scale of the balance. Anywhere from five
hundred to nine hundred pounds of thrust will take a monoplane or
biplane up. But Tom wanted more than this.

Once more the motor coughed and spluttered, and the big blades whirled
about so fast that they seemed like solid pieces of wood. Tom stood on
the ground near the levers which controlled the speed, and Ned watched
the scale.

"How much?" yelled the young inventor.

"Eight hundred."

Tom turned on a little more gasolene.

"How much?" he cried again.

"Ten hundred. That'll do!"

"No, I'm going to try for more."

Again he advanced the spark and gasolene levers, and the comparatively
frail craft vibrated so that it seemed as if she would fly apart.

"Now?" yelled Tom.

"Eleven hundred and fifty!" cried Ned.

"Good! That'll do it. She'll give more after she's been running a
while.  We'll go up."

Ned scrambled to his seat, and Tom followed. He had an arrangement so
that he could slip loose the retaining rope from his perch whenever he
was ready.

Waiting until the motor had run another minute, the young inventor
pulled the rope that released them. Over the smooth starting ground
that formed a part of the Swift homestead darted the aeroplane. Faster
and faster she moved, Ned gripping the sides of his seat.

"Here we go!" cried Tom, and the next instant they shot up into the air.

Ned Newton had ridden many times with his chum Tom, and the sensation
of gliding through the upper regions was not new to him. But this time
there was something different. The propellers seemed to take hold of
the air with a firmer grip. There was more power, and certainly the
speed was terrific.

"We're going fast!" yelled Ned into Tom's ear.

"That's right," agreed the young inventor. "She'll beat anything but my
Sky Racer, and she'd do that if she was the same size." Tom referred to
a very small aeroplane he had made some time before. It was like some
big bird, and very swift.

Up and onward went the remodeled airship, faster and faster, until,
when several miles had been covered, Ned realized that the young
inventor had achieved another triumph.

"It's great, Tom! Great!" he yelled.

"Yes, I guess it will do, Ned. I'm satisfied. If there was an
international meet now I'd capture some of the prizes. As it is--"

Tom stopped suddenly. His voice which had been raised to overcome the
noise of even the muffled motor, sounded unnaturally loud, and no
wonder, for the engine had ceased working!

"What's the matter?" gasped Ned.

"I don't know--a breakdown of some kind."

"Can you get it going again?"

"I'm going to try."

Tom was manipulating various levers, but with no effect. The aeroplane
was shooting downward with frightful rapidity.

"No use!" exclaimed the young inventor. "Something has broken."

"But we're falling, Tom!"

"I know it. We've done it before. I'm going to volplane to earth."

This, it may be explained, is gliding downward from a height with the
engine shut off. Aeroplanists often do it, and Tom was no novice at the
art.

They shot downward with less speed now, for the young inventor had
thrown up his headplanes to act as a sort of brake. Then, a little
later they made a good landing in a field near a small house, in a
rather lonely stretch of country, about ten miles from Shopton, where
Tom lived.

"Now to see what the trouble is," remarked our hero, as he climbed out
of his seat and began looking over the engine. He poked in among the
numerous cogs, wheels and levers, and finally uttered an exclamation.

"Find it?" asked Ned.

"Yes, it's in the magneto. All the platinum bearings and contact
surfaces have fused and crystallized. I never saw such poor platinum as
I've been getting lately, and I pay the highest prices for it, too. The
trouble is that the supply of platinum is giving out, and they'll have
to find a substitute I guess."

"Can't we go home in her?" asked Ned.

"I'm afraid not. I've got to put in new platinum bearings and contacts
before she'll spark. I only wish I could get hold of some of the better
kind of metal."

The magneto of an aeroplane performs a service similar to one in an
automobile. It provides the spark that explodes the charge of gas in
the cylinders, and platinum is a metal, more valuable now than gold,
much used in the delicate parts of the magneto.

"Well, I guess it's walk for ours," said Ned ruefully.

"I'm afraid so," went on Tom. "If I only had some platinum, I could--"

"Perhaps I could be of service to you," suddenly spoke a voice behind
them, and turning, the youths saw a tall, bearded man, who had
evidently come from the lonely house. "Did I hear you say you needed
some platinum?" he asked. He spoke with a foreign accent, and Tom at
once put him down for a Russian.

"Yes, I need some for my magneto," began the young inventor.

"If you will kindly step up to my house, perhaps I can give you what
you want," went on the man. "My name is Ivan Petrofsky, and I have only
lately come to live here."

"I'm Tom Swift, of Shopton, and this is my chum, Ned Newton," replied
the young inventor, completing the introductions. He was wondering why
the man, who seemed a cultured gentleman, should live in such a lonely
place, and he was wondering too how he happened to have some platinum.

"Will that answer?" asked Mr. Petrofsky, when they had reached his
house, and he had handed Tom several strips of the precious silverlike
metal.

"Do? I should say it would! My, but that is the best platinum I've seen
in a long while!" exclaimed Tom, who was an expert judge of this metal.
"Where did you get it, if I may ask?"

"It came from a lost mine in Siberia," was the unexpected answer.

"A lost mine?" gasped Tom.

"In Siberia?" added Ned.

Mr. Petrofsky slowly nodded his head, and smiled, but rather sadly.

"A lost mine," he said slowly, "and if it could be found I would be the
happiest man on earth for I would then be able to locate and save my
brother, who is one of the Czar's exiles," and he seemed shaken by
emotion.

Tom and Ned stood looking at the bearded man, and then the young
inventor glanced at the platinum strips in his hand while a strange and
daring thought came to him.




CHAPTER II

A DARING PROJECT


While Tom and his chum are in the house of the Russian, who so
strangely produced the platinum just when it was most needed, I am
going to take just a little time to tell you something about the hero
of this story.  Those who have read the previous books of this series
need no introduction to him, but in justice to my new readers I must
make a little explanation.

Tom Swift was an inventor, as was his father before him. But Mr. Swift
was getting too old, now, to do much, though he had a pet
invention--that of a gyroscope--on which he worked from time to time.
Tom lived with his father in the village of Shopton, in New York state.
His mother was dead, but a housekeeper, named Mrs. Baggert, looked
after the wants of the inventors, young and old.

The first book of the series was called "Tom Swift and His
Motor-Cycle," and in that I related how Tom bought the machine from a
Mr. Wakefield Damon, of Waterford, after the odd gentleman had
unintentionally started to climb a tree with it. That disgusted Mr.
Damon with motor-cycling, and Tom had lots of fun on the machine, and
not a few daring adventures.

He and Mr. Damon became firm friends, and the oddity of the
gentleman--mainly that of blessing everything he could think of--was no
objection in Tom's mind. The young inventor and Ned Newton went on many
trips together, Mr. Damon being one of the party.

In Shopton lived Andy Foger, a bullying sort of a chap, who acted very
meanly toward Tom at times. Another resident of the town was a Mr.
Nestor, but Tom was more interested in his daughter Mary than in the
head of the household. Add Eradicate Sampson, an eccentric colored man
who said he got his name because he "eradicated" dirt, and his mule,
Boomerang, and I think you have met the principal characters of these
stories.

After Tom had much enjoyment out of his motor-cycle, he got a motor
boat, and one of his rivals on Lake Carlopa was this same Andy Foger,
but our hero vanquished him. Then Tom built an airship, which had been
the height of his ambition for some years. He had a stirring cruise in
the Red Cloud, and then, deserting the air for the water, Tom and his
father built a submarine, in which they went after sunken treasure. In
the book, "Tom Swift and His Electric Runabout," I told how, in the
speediest car on the road, Tom saved his father's bank from ruin, and
in the book dealing with Tom's wireless message I related how he saved
the Castaways of Earthquake Island.

When Tom went among the diamond makers, at the request of Mr. Barco
Jenks, and discovered the secret of phantom mountain the lad fancied
that might be the end of his adventures, but there were more to follow.
Going to the caves of ice, his airship was wrecked, but he and his
friends managed to get back home, and then it was that the young
inventor perfected his sky racer, in which he made the quickest flight
on record.

Most startling were his adventures in elephant land whither he went
with his electric rifle, and he was the means of saving a missionary,
Mr. Illingway and his wife, from the red pygmies.

Tom had not been home from Africa long before he got a letter from this
missionary, telling about an underground city in Mexico that was said
to be filled with gold. Tom went there, and in the book, entitled, "Tom
Swift in the City of Gold," I related his adventures.

How he and his friends were followed by the Fogers, how they eluded
them, made their way to the ruined temple in a small dirigible balloon,
descended to the secret tunnel, managed to turn aside the underground
river, and reach the city of gold with its wonderful gold statues--all
this is told in the volume.

Then, after pulling down, in the centre of the underground city, the
big golden statue, the door of rock descended, and made our friends
prisoners. They almost died, but Andy Foger and his father, in league
with some rascally Mexicans and a tribe of head-hunters, finally made
their way to the tunnel, and most unexpectedly, released Tom and his
friends.

There was a fight, but our hero's party escaped with considerable gold
and safely reached Shopton. Now, after a winter spent in work, fixing
over an old aeroplane, we again meet Tom.

"Would you mind telling me something about where this platinum comes
from, and if you can get any more of it?" asked Tom, after a pause,
following the strange statement made by the Russian.

"I will gladly tell you the story," spoke Mr. Petrofsky, "for I am much
interested in inventions, and I formerly did something in that line
myself, and I have even made a small aeroplane, so you see I know the
need of platinum in a high power magneto."

"But where did you get such pure metal?" asked Tom. "I have never seen
it's equal."

"There is none like it in all the world," went on the Russian, "and
perhaps there never can be any more. I have only a small supply. But in
Siberia--in the lost mine--there is a large quantity of it, as pure as
this, needing only a little refining.

"Can't we get some from there?" asked the young inventor eagerly. "I
should think the Russian government would mine it, and export it."

"They would--if they could find it," said Ivan Petrofsky dryly, "but
they can't--no one can find it--and I have tried very hard--so hard, in
fact, that it is the reason for my coming to this country--that and the
desire to find and aid my brother, who is a Siberian exile."

"This is getting interesting," remarked Ned to Tom in a low voice, and
the young inventor nodded.

"My brother Peter, who is younger than I by a few years, and I, are the
last of our family," began Mr. Petrofsky, motioning Tom and Ned to take
chairs. "We lived in St. Petersburg, and early in life, though we were
of the nobility, we took up the cause of the common people."

"Nihilists?" asked Ned eagerly, for he had read something of these
desperate men.

"No, and not anarchists," said Mr. Petrofsky with a sad smile. "Our
party was opposed to violence, and we depended on education to aid our
cause. Then, too, we did all we could in a quiet way to help the poor.
My brother and I invented several life-saving and labor-saving machines
and in this way we incurred the enmity of the rich contractors and
government officials, who made more money the more people they could
have working for them, for they made the people buy their food and
supplies from them.

"But my brother, and I persisted, with the result that we were both
arrested, and, with a number of others were sent to Siberia.

"Of the horrors we endured there I will say nothing. However, you have
probably read much. In the country near which we were quartered there
were many mines, some of salt and some of sulphur. Oh, the horrors of
those mines! Many a poor exile has been lost in the windings of a salt
mine, there to die miserably. And in the sulphur mines many die also,
not from being lost so much as being overcome by stifling gases. It is
terrible! And sometimes they are purposely abandoned by their guides,
for the government wants to get rid of certain exiles.

"But you are interested in platinum. One day my brother and I who had
been sent to work in the salt mines, mistook a turning and wandered on
and on for several miles, finally losing our way. We had food and water
with us, or we would have perished, and, as it was, we nearly died
before we finally found our way out of an abandoned opening.

"We came out in the midst of a terrible snowstorm, and wandered about
almost frozen. At last we were found by a serf who, in his sled, took
us to his poor cottage. There we were warmed and fed back to life.

"We knew we would be searched for, as naturally, our absence would lead
to the suspicion that we had tried to escape. So as soon as we were
able, we started back to the town where we were quartered. The serf
wanted to take us in his sled, but we knew he might be suspected of
having tried to aid us to get away, and he might be arrested. So we
went alone.

"As might have been expected, we became lost again, and wandered about
for several days. But we had enough food to keep us alive. And it was
during this wandering that I came upon the platinum mine. It was down
in a valley, in the midst of a country densely wooded and very
desolate.  There was an outcropping of the ore, and rather idly I put
some of it in my pockets. Then we wandered on, and finally after awful
suffering in terrific storms, were found by a searching party and
brought back to the barracks."

"Did they think you had escaped?" asked Tom.

"They did," replied the Russian, "and they punished us severely for it,
in spite of our denials. In time I managed secretly to smelt the
platinum ore, and I found I had some of the purest metal I had ever
seen. I was wishing I could find the mine, or tell some of my friends
about it, when one of the officers discovered the metal in my bed.

"He demanded to know where I had gotten it, and knowing that refusal
would only make it the worse for me I told him. There was considerable
excitement, for the value of the discovery was recognized, and a search
was at once made for the mine.

"But, even with the aid we were able to give, it could not be located.
Many expeditions went out to hunt for it but came back baffled. They
could not penetrate that wild country."

"They should have used an aeroplane," suggested Tom.

"They did," replied the Russian quickly, "but it was of no use."

"Why not?" the young inventor wanted to know.

"Because of the terrific winds that almost continually sweep over that
part of Siberia. They never seem to cease, and there are treacherous
air currents and 'pockets' that engulfed more than one luckless
aviator. Oh, you may be sure the Russian government spared no means of
finding the lost platinum mine, but they could not locate it, or even
get near the place where they supposed it to be.

"Then, perhaps thinking that my brother and I were concealing
something, they separated us. Where they sent him I do not know, but I
was doomed to the sulphur mines. I was heartbroken, and I scarcely
cared whether I lived or died. But an opportunity of escape came, and I
took it. I wanted to save my brother, but I did not know where he was,
and I thought if I could make my way to some civilized country, or to
free America, I might later be able to save my brother.

"I went to England, taking some of my precious platinum with me, and
stayed there for two years. I learned your language, but my efforts to
organize an expedition to search for the lost mine, and for my brother,
failed. Then I came here, and--well, I am still trying."

"My! That is certainly interesting!" exclaimed Ned, who had been all
attention during the telling of the story.

"And you certainly had a hard time," declared Tom. "I am much obliged
for this platinum. Have you set a price on it? It is worth much more
than the ordinary kind."

"The price is nothing to you," replied the Russian, with a smile. "I am
only too glad to help you fix your aeroplane. Will it take long? I
should like to watch you."

"Come along," invited Tom. "I can soon have it going again, and I'll
give you a ride, if you like."

"No, thank you, I'm hardly up to that yet, though I may be some day.
The machine I made never flew well and I had several bad falls."

Tom and Ned worked rapidly on the magneto, and soon had replaced the
defective bits of platinum.

"If the Russians had such a machine as this maybe they could have
gotten to that mine," suggested Ned, who was very proud of Tom's craft.

"It would be useless in the terrific winds, I fear," answered Ivan
Petrofsky. "But now I care little for the mine. It is my brother whom I
want to save. He must be in some of the Siberian mines, and if I had
such a craft as this I might be able to rescue him."

Tom Swift dropped the file he was using. A bright light sparkled in his
eyes. He seemed strangely excited.

"Mr. Petrofsky!" he cried, "would you let me have a try at finding your
brother, and would you come with me?"

"Would I?" asked the Russian eagerly. "I would be your debtor for life,
and I would always pray for you, if you could help me to save my
brother Peter."

"Then we'll have a try at it!" cried Tom. "I've got a different airship
than this--one in which I can travel three thousand miles without
coming down. I haven't had any excitement since I got back from the
city of gold. I'm going to Russia to help you rescue your brother from
exile, and I'm also going to have a try for that lost platinum
treasure!"

"Thank heaven, there is some hope for poor Peter at last," murmured Mr.
Petrofsky earnestly.

"You never can get to the platinum mine," said Ned. "The winds will
tear your airship to pieces."

"Not the kind I'm going to make," declared Tom. "It's going to be an
air glider, that will fairly live on high winds. Ho! for Siberia and
the platinum mines. Will you come?"

"I don't know what you mean by an air glider, Tom Swift, but I'll go to
help rescue my brother," was the quick answer, and then, with the light
of a daring resolve shining in his eyes, the young inventor proceeded
to get his aeroplane in shape for the trip back to Shopton.




CHAPTER III

THE HAND OF THE CZAR


"Then you won't take a ride with me to-day?" asked the young inventor,
of the Russian, as he completed the repairs to the magneto. "I'd like
to have you meet my father, and a friend of his, Mr. Damon. Most likely
he'll go to Siberia with us, if his wife will let him. I'd like to talk
some plans over with you."

"I shall certainly call on you," answered Ivan Petrofsky, "but," he
added with a smile, "I think I should prefer to take my first ride in
your larger airship--the one that doesn't come down so often."

"Well, perhaps it is a little easier on an amateur," admitted Tom. "If
you'll come over to our house at any time I'll take you out in it, or
I'll call for you."

"I'll come over in a few days," answered the escaped exile. "Then I'll
tell you all I know of the locality where the platinum mine is located,
and we can make our plans. In the meanwhile don't say anything about
what I have told you."

"Why?" asked Ned quickly.

Mr. Petrofsky approached closer to the lads, and in a low voice said:

"I am not sure about it, but of late I think I have been shadowed. I
have seen strange men in the village near here and they have eyed me
rather suspiciously. Then, too, I have surprised several men around my
house. I live here all alone, you know, and do most of my own work, a
woman coming in occasionally to clean. But I don't like these
suspicious characters hanging about.

"Who do you think they are?" asked Tom.

"I'm almost afraid to think, but from my past experience I think--nay,
I fear--they may be spies, or agents of the Russian government."

"Spies!" cried Ned.

"Hush. Not so loud," cautioned Mr. Petrofsky. "They may even now be in
hiding, especially since your aeroplane landed so near my house. They
may see something suspicious even in that."

"But why should the Russian government set spies on you?" asked Tom in
a low voice.

"For two reasons. I am an escaped exile, and I am not a citizen of the
United States. Therefore I may be sent back to the sulphur mines. And
another reason is that they may think I know the secret of the platinum
treasure--the lost mine."

"Say this is getting interesting!" exclaimed Tom. "If we are going to
have a brush with some of the spies of the Russian government so much
the better. I'm ready for 'em!"

"So am I!" added Ned.

"You don't know them," said Mr. Petrofsky, and he could not repress a
shudder. "I hope they are not on my trail, but if they are--" he paused
a moment, straightened himself up, and looked like what he was, a
strong man--"if they are let them look out. I'd give my life to save my
brother from the awful, living death to which he is consigned!"

"And we're with you!" cried Tom, offering the Russian his hand. "We'll
turn the trick yet. Now don't forget to come and see us. Come along,
Ned. If I'm going to build an air glider I've got to get busy." And
waving farewells to their new friend, the lads took their places in the
aeroplane and were soon on their way to Shopton.

"Well, what do you think of it?" asked Ned of his chum, as they sped
along at a good elevation, the engine going at half speed to be less
noisy and make talking easier.

"Lots. I think we're in for a good time, an exciting one, anyhow, if
what he says is true. But what in the world is an air glider, Tom?"

"It's the last word in aeroplanes. You don't need a motor to make it
go."

"Don't need a motor?"

"No, the wind does it all. It's a sort of aeroplane, but the motion
comes from the wind, acting on different planes, and this is
accomplished by shifting weights. In it you can stand still in a fierce
gale, if you like."

"How, by tying her fast on the ground?"

"No, hovering in the air. It's all done by getting the proper balance.
The harder the wind blows the better the air glider works, and that's
why I think it will be just the thing for Siberia. I'm going to get
right at work on it, and you'll help me; won't you?"

"I sure will. Say, is platinum worth much?"

"Worth much? I should say it was! It's got gold beat now, and the
available supply is very small, and it's getting more scarce. Russia
has several mines, and the metal is of good quality. I've used some
Russian platinum, but the kind Mr. Petrofsky gave me to-day was better
than the best I ever had. If we can only find that lost mine we'll be
millionaires all right."

"That's what we thought when we found the city of gold, but the gold
wasn't of as fine a grade as we hoped."

"Well, nothing like that can happen in this platinum deal. It sure is
rich ore that Mr. Petrofsky and his brother found. Poor fellow! To
think of being an exile in that awful country, not knowing where you
may be sent next. No wonder Mr. Petrofsky wants to rescue him."

"That's right. Well, here we are. I wonder what your father will say
when he hears you're thinking of another expedition, Tom?"

"Oh, he'll want me to go when he hears about the exile."

"And I'm sure my folks will let me go. How about Mr. Damon?"

"I don't believe we can hold him back. It will make a nice party, just
you and I, and Mr. Damon and Mr. Petrofsky. That will leave room for
the other Russian--if we can rescue him," and with that Tom shut off
the engine and glided to earth.

It may well be imagined that Mr. Swift was surprised when his son told
him the latest news, but he did not offer any serious objection to the
young inventor going to Siberia.

"Only you must be careful," he said. "Those Russian officers are ugly
when it comes to trying to take away any of their prisoners. And this
air glider--I don't exactly know about that. It's a new machine, and
you want to be sure it works before you trust yourself to it."

"I will," promised Tom. "Say, I've got plenty of work ahead of me,--to
get my big airship in shape, and build the glider. You'll have to help
me, dad."

"I will, son. Now tell me more about this Mr. Petrofsky." Which Tom did.

The days that followed were indeed busy ones for Tom. The young
inventor made a model air glider that sailed fairly well, but he knew
it would have to work better to be successful, and he bent all his
energies in that direction. Meanwhile Mr. Damon had been told of the
prospective trip.

"Bless my bank book! Of course I'll go," he said. "But don't say
anything about it to my wife--that is, just yet. I'll bring her around
to it gradually. She has always wanted a diamond ring set in platinum,
and now I can get it for her. I know she'll let me go if I break it to
her gently."

It may be mentioned here that many valuable diamonds are now set in
platinum instead of gold.

"I want to keep busy," said Mr. Damon, so Tom set him, Ned and
Eradicate at the task of getting the big airship in shape for the trip.
This air craft has not figured in any of my previous stories, but as it
is so nearly like the one that was crushed in the caves of ice, I will
not give a description of it here. Those who care to may refer to the
book telling of Tom's trip to the caves of ice for a detailed account
of the craft.

Sufficient to say that this latest airship, named the Falcon, was the
largest Tom had ever built. It contained much room, many comforts, and
could sail for several thousand miles without descending, except in
case of accident. It was a combined dirigible balloon and aeroplane,
and could be used as either, the necessary gas being made on board. It
was large enough to enable the air glider to be taken on it in sections.

It was about a week after their first meeting with him, that Ivan
Petrofsky paid a visit to the Swift home. He was warmly welcomed by the
aged inventor and Mr. Damon, and, closeted in the library of the house,
he proceeded to go more into details of his own and his brother's exile
to Siberia, and to tell about the supposed location of the lost
platinum mine.

"I don't believe we can start for several weeks yet," said Tom, after
some discussion. "It will take me that long to make the glider."

"And I, too, need a little time," said the Russian. "I will write to
some friends in St. Petersburg and perhaps they can get some
information for us, as to where my brother is.

"That will be good," declared Mr. Damon. "Bless my icicle! But the more
I think of this trip the better I like it!"

It was arranged that the Russian should call again soon, when the plans
would be nearer in shape, and in the meanwhile he must learn all he
could from revolutionary friends in Siberia.

It was a week after this, during which Tom, Ned and the others had been
very busy, that Tom decided to take a trip to see their Russian friend.
They had not heard from him since his visit, and Tom wanted to learn
something about the strength of the Siberian winds.

He and Ned went in one of the small airships and soon they were
hovering over the grounds surrounding the lonely house where Ivan
Petrofsky lived.

"He doesn't seem to be at home," remarked Ned, as they descended and
approached the dwelling.

"No, and it looks quite deserted," agreed the young inventor. "Say, all
the doors are open, too! He shouldn't go away and leave his house open
like that--with the valuable platinum there."

"Maybe he's asleep," suggested Ned.

They knocked on the opened door, but there was no answer. Then they
went inside. To their surprise the house was in confusion. Furniture
was overturned, tables and chairs were broken, and papers were
scattered about the room.

"There's been a fight here!" cried Tom.

"That's right," agreed Ned. "Maybe he's been hurt--maybe burglars came
for the platinum!"

"Come on!" cried Tom, making a dash for the stairs. "We'll see if he's
here."

The house was small, and it took but a moment to show that Mr.
Petrofsky was not there. Upstairs, as below, was the same
confusion--the overturned furniture and the papers scattered about.

Tom stooped and picked up a scrap that looked like a piece torn from a
letter. On top was a seal--the black seal of Russia--the imperial arms
of the Czar!

"Look!" cried Tom, holding out the paper.

"What is it?" asked Ned.

"The hand of the Czar!" answered his chum. "It has reached out from
Russia, and taken Mr. Petrofsky away!"




CHAPTER IV

THE SEARCH


For a moment Ned could scarcely understand what Tom meant. It scarcely
seemed possible that such a thing could happen. That some one in
far-off Russia--be it the Czar or one of the secret police--could
operate from such a distance, seeking out a man in an obscure house in
a little American village, and snatching him away.

"It isn't possible!" declared Ned breathlessly.

"What difference does that make?" asked Tom. "The thing has happened,
and you can't get out of it. Look at all the evidence--there's been a
fight, that's sure, and Mr. Petrofsky is gone."

"But maybe he went away of his own accord," insisted Ned, who was
sometimes hard to convince.

"Nonsense! If a man went away of his own accord would he smash up his
furniture, leave his papers scattered all about and go off leaving the
doors and windows open for any one to walk in? I guess not."

"Well, maybe you're right. But think of it! This isn't Russia!"

"No, but he's a Russian subject, and, by his own confession an escaped
exile. If he was arrested in the usual way he could be taken back, and
our government couldn't interfere. He's been taken back all right. Poor
man! Think of being doomed to those sulphur mines again, and as he
escaped they'll probably make it all the harder for him!"

"But I thought our government wouldn't help other nations to get back
prisoners convicted of political crimes," suggested Ned. "That's all
Mr. Petrofsky was guilty of--politics, trying to help the poor in his
own country. It's a shame if our government stands for anything like
that!"

"That's just the point!" exclaimed Tom. "Probably the spies, secret
police, or whoever the Russian agents were, didn't ask any help from
our government. If they did there might be a chance for him. But likely
they worked in secret. They came here, sneaked in on him, and took him
away before he could get help. Jove! If he could only have gotten word
to me I'd have come in the airship, and then there'd be a different
ending to this."

"I guess you're right, Tom. Well, that ends it I suppose."

"Ends what?"

"Our trip to the platinum mine."

"Not a bit of it. I'm going to have a hunt for it."

"But how can you when Mr. Petrofsky can't go along to show us the way?
Besides, we wanted to help rescue his brother, and now we can't."

"Well, I'm going to make a big try," declared the young inventor
firmly.  "And the first thing I'm going to do is to get our friend out
of the clutches of the Russian police."

"You are? How?"

"I'm going to make a search for him. Look here, Ned, he must have been
taken away some time to-day--perhaps only a few hours ago--and they
can't have gone far with him."

"How do you make that out?" Ned wanted to know.

"Well, I guess I'm detective enough for that," and Tom smiled. "Look
here, the doors and windows are open. Now it rained last night, and
there was quite a wind. If the windows had been open in the storm
there'd be some traces of moisture in the rooms. But there isn't a
drop.  Consequently the windows have been opened since last night."

"Say, that's so!" cried Ned admiringly.

"But that's not all," went on Tom. "Here's a bottle of milk on the
table, and it's fresh," which he proved by tasting it. "Now that was
left by the milkman either late last night or early this morning. I
don't believe it's over twelve hours old."

"Well, what does this mean?" asked Ned, who couldn't quite follow Tom's
line of reasoning.

"To my mind it means that the spies were here no later than this
morning. Look at the table upset, the dishes on the floor. Here's one
with oatmeal in it, and you know how hard and firm cooked oatmeal gets
after it stands a bit. This is quite fresh, and soft, and--"

"And that means--" interrupted Ned, who was in turn interrupted by Tom,
who exclaimed:

"It means that Mr. Petrofsky was at breakfast when they burst in on
him, and took him away. They had hard work overpowering him, I'll
wager, for he could put up a pretty good fight. And the broken
furniture is evidence of that. Then the spies, after tying him up, or
putting him in a carriage, searched the house for incriminating papers.
That's as plain as the nose on your face. Then the police agents, or
whoever they were, skipped out in a hurry, not taking the trouble to
close the windows and doors."

"I believe it did happen that way," agreed Ned, who clearly saw what
Tom meant. "But what can we do? How can we find him?"

"By getting on the trail," answered his chum quickly. "There may be
more clews in the house, and I'm sure there'll be some out of doors,
for they must have left footprints or the marks of carriage wheels.
We'll take a look, and then we'll get right on the search. I'm not
going to let them take Mr. Petrofsky to Russia if I can help it. I want
to get after that platinum, and he's the only one who can pilot us
anywhere near the place; and besides, there's his brother we've got to
rescue. We'll make a search for the exile."

"I'm with you!" cried Ned. "Jove! Wouldn't it be great if we could
rescue him? They can't have gotten very far with him."

"I'm afraid they have quite a start on us," admitted Tom with a dubious
shake of his head, "but as long as they're in the United States we have
a chance. If ever they get him on Russian soil it's all up with him."

"Come on then!" cried Ned. "Let's get busy. What's the first thing to
do?"

"Look for clews," replied Tom. "We'll begin at the top of the house and
work down. It's lucky we came when we did, for every minute counts."

Then the two plucky lads began their search for the kidnapped Russian
exile. Had those who took him away seen the mere youths who thus
devoted themselves to the task, they might have laughed in contempt,
but those who know Tom Swift and his sturdy chum, know that two more
resourceful and brave lads would be hard to find.




CHAPTER V

A CLEW FROM RUSSIA


"Nothing much up here," remarked Tom, when he and Ned had gone all over
the second floor twice. "That scrap of paper, which put me on to the
fact that some one from the Russian government had been here, is about
all. They must have taken all the documents Mr. Petrofsky had."

"Maybe he didn't have any," suggested Ned.

"If he was wise he'd get rid of them when he knew he was being
shadowed, as he told us. Perhaps that was why they broke up the
furniture, searching for hidden papers, or they may have done it out of
spite because they didn't find anything. But we might as well go
downstairs and look there."

But the first floor was equally unproductive of clews, save those
already noted, which showed, at least so Tom believed, that Mr.
Petrofsky had been surprised and overpowered while at breakfast.

"Now for outside!" cried the young inventor. "We'll see if we can
figure out how they got him away."

There were plenty of marks in the soft ground and turf, which was still
damp from the night's rain, though it was now afternoon. Unfortunately,
however, in approaching the house after leaving the aeroplane, Ned and
Tom had not thought to exercise caution, and, not suspecting anything
wrong, they had stepped on a number of footprints left by the
kidnappers.

But for all that, they saw enough to convince them that several men had
been at the lonely house, for there were many marks of shoes. It was
out of the question, however, to tell which were those of Mr. Petrofsky
and which those of his captors.

"They might have carried him out to a carriage they had in waiting,"
suggested Ned. "Let's go out to the front gate and look in the road.
They hardly would bring the carriage up to the door."

"Good idea," commented Tom, and they hurried to the main thoroughfare
that passed the Russian's house.

"Here they are!" cried Ned, who was in the lead. "There's been a
carriage here as sure as you're a foot high and it's a rubber-tired one
too."

"GOOD!" cried Tom admiringly. "You're coming right along in your
detective training. How do you make that out?"

"See here, where a piece of rubber has been broken or cut out of the
tire. It makes a peculiar mark in the dirt every time the wheel goes
around."

"That's right, and it will be a good thing to trace the carriage by.
Come on, we'll keep right after it."

"Hold on a bit," suggested Ned, who, though not so quick as Tom Swift,
frequently produced good results by his very slowness. "Are you going
off and leave the airship here for some one to walk off with?"

"Guess they wouldn't take it far," replied the young inventor, "but I'd
better make it safe. I'll disconnect it so they can't start it, though
if Andy Foger happens to come along he might slash the planes just out
of spite. But I guess he won't show up."

Tom took a connecting pin out of the electrical apparatus, making it
impossible to start the aeroplane, and then, wheeling it out of sight
behind a small barn, he and Ned went back to the carriage marks in the
road.

"Hurry!" urged Tom, as he started off in the direction of the village
of Hurdtown, near where the cottage stood. "We will ask people living
along the highway if they've seen a carriage pass."

"But what makes you think they went off that way?" asked Ned. "I should
think they'd head away from the village, so as not to be seen."

"No, I don't agree with you. But wait, we'll look at the marks. Maybe
that will help us."

Peering carefully at the marks of horses' hoofs and the wheel
impressions, Tom uttered a cry of discovery.

"I have it!" he declared. "The carriage came from the village, and kept
right on the other way. You're right, Ned. They didn't go back to town.

"Are you sure?"

"Of course. You can see for yourself; if the carriage had turned around
the track would show, but it doesn't and, even if they turned on the
grass, there'd be two lines of marks--one coming out here and one
returning. As it is there is only a single set--just as if the carriage
drove up here, took on its load, and continued on. This way, Ned."

They hurried down the road, and soon came to a cluster of farm houses.
Inquiries there, however, failed to bring anything to light, for either
the occupants of the house had failed to notice passing vehicles, or
there had been so many that any particular carriage was not recalled.
And there were now so many impressions in the soft dirt of the
highway--so many wheel tracks and hoof imprints--that it was impossible
to pick out those of the carriage with the cut rubber tire. "Well, I
guess it isn't of much use to go on any farther," spoke Ned, when they
had traveled several miles and had learned nothing.

"We'll try one more house, and then go back," agreed Tom. "We'll tell
dad about what's happened, and see what he says."

"Carriage?" repeated an old farmer to whom they next put the question.
"Wa'al, now, come t' think of it, I did see one drivin' along here
early this morning. It had rubber tires on too, for I recollect
remarkin' t' myself that it didn't make much noise. Had t' talk t'
myself," he added in explanation, "'cause nobody else in the family was
up, 'ceptin' th' dog."

"Did the carriage have some Russians in it?" asked Tom eagerly, "and
was one a big bearded man?"

"Wa'al, now you've got me," admitted the farmer frankly. "It was quite
early you see, and I didn't take no particular notice. I got up early
t' do my milkin' 'cause I have t' take it t' th' cheese factory. That's
th' reason nobody was up but me. But I see this carriage comin' down
th' road, and thinks I t' myself it was pretty middlin' early fer
anybody t' be takin' a pleasure ride. I 'lowed it were a pleasure ride,
'cause it were one of them hacks that folks don't usually use 'ceptin'
fer a weddin', or a funeral, an' it wa'n't no funeral."

"Then you can't tell us anything more except that it passed?" asked Ned.

"No, I couldn't see inside, 'cause it was rather dark at that hour, and
then, too, I noticed that they had th' window shades down."

"That's suspicious!" exclaimed Tom. "I believe they are the fellows we're
after," and, without giving any particulars he said that they were
looking for a friend who might have been taken away against his will.

"Could you tell where they were going?" asked Tom, scarcely hoping to
get an affirmative answer.

"Wa'al, th' man on th' seat pulled up when he see me," spoke the farmer
with exasperating slowness, "an' asked me how far it was t' th'
Waterville station, an' I told him."

"Why didn't you say so at first?" asked Tom quickly. "Why didn't you
tell us they were heading for the railroad?"

"You didn't ask me," replied the farmer. "What difference does it make."

"Every minute counts!" exclaimed the young inventor. "We want to keep
right after those fellows. Maybe the agent can tell us where they
bought tickets to, and we can trace them that way.

"Shouldn't wonder," commented the farmer. "There ain't many trains out
from Waterville at that time of day, an' mighty few passengers.
Shouldn't wonder but Jake Applesauer could put ye on th' trail."

"Much obliged," called Tom. "Come on, Ned," and he started back in the
direction of the house where the kidnapping had taken place.

"That ain't th' way t' 'vaterville!" the farmer shouted after them.

"I know it, we're going to get our airship," answered Tom, and then he
heard the farmer mutter.

"Plumb crazy! That's what they be! Plumb crazy! Going after their
airship! Shouldn't wonder but they was escaped lunatics, and the other
fellers was keepers after 'em. Hu! Wa'al, I've got my work to do.
'Tain't none of my affair."

"Let him think what he likes," commented Ned as he and his chum hurried
on. "We're on the trail all right."

If Jake Applesauer, the agent at the Waterville station, was surprised
at seeing two youths drop down out of an aeroplane, and begin
questioning him about some suspicious strangers that had taken the
morning train, he did not show it. Jake prided himself on not being
surprised at anything, except once when he took a counterfeit dollar in
return for a ticket, and had to make it good to the company.

But, to the despair of Tom and Ned, he could not help them much. He had
seen the party, of course. They had driven up in the hack, and one of
the men seemed to be sick, or hurt, for his head was done up in
bandages, and the others had to half carry him on the train.

"That was Mr. Petrofsky all right," declared Ned.

"Sure," assented Tom. "They must have hurt and drugged him. But you
can't tell us for what station they bought tickets, Mr. Applesauer?"

"No, for they didn't buy any. They must have had 'em, or else they paid
on the train. One man drove off in the coach, and that's all I know."

As Tom and Ned started back to Shopton in the aeroplane they discussed
what could be done next. A hard task lay before them, and they realized
that.

"They could have gotten off at any station between here and New York,
or even changed to another railroad at the junction," spoke Tom. "It's
going to be a hard job."

"Guess we'll have to get some regular detectives on it," suggested Ned.

"And that's what I'll do," declared the young inventor. "They may be
able to locate Mr. Petrofsky before those spies take him out of this
country. If they don't--it will be too late. I'm going to talk to dad
about it, and if he agrees I'll hire the best private detectives."

Mr. Swift gave his consent when Tom had told the story, and, a day
later, one of the best detectives of a well known agency called on Tom
in Shopton and assumed charge of the case.

The early reports from the detective were quite reassuring. He got on
the trail of the men who had taken Mr. Petrofsky away, and confirmed
the suspicion that they were agents of the Russian police. He trailed
them as far as New York, and there the clews came to an end.

"Whether they are in the big city, which might easily be, or in some of
the nearby towns, will take some time to learn," the detective wrote,
and Tom wired back telling him to keep on searching.

But, as several weeks went by, and no word came, even Tom began to give
up hope, though he did not stop work on the air glider, which was
nearing completion. And then, most unexpectedly a clew came--a clew
from far-off Russia.

Tom got a letter one day--a letter in a strange hand, the stamp and
postmark showing that it had come from the land of the Czar.

"What do you suppose it contains?" asked Ned, who was with his chum
when the communication was received.

"Haven't the least idea; but I'll soon find out."

"Maybe it's from the Russian police, telling you to keep away from
Siberia."

"Maybe," answered Tom absently, for he was reading the missive. "I
say!" he suddenly cried. "This is great! A clew at last, and from St.
Petersburg! Listen to this, Ned!

"This letter is from the head of one of the secret societies over
there, a society that works against the government. It says that Mr.
Petrofsky is being detained a prisoner in a lonely hut on the Atlantic
sea coast, not far from New York--Sandy Hook the letter says--and here
are the very directions how to get there!"

"No!" cried Ned, in disbelief. "How in the world could anybody in
Russia know that."

"It tells here," said Tom. "It's all explained. As soon as the secret
police got Mr. Petrofsky they communicated with the head officials in
St. Petersburg. You know nearly everyone is a spy over there, and the
letter says that Mr. Petrofsky's friends there soon heard the news, and
even about the exact place where he is being held."

"What are they holding him for?" asked Ned.

"That's explained, too. It seems they can't legally take him back until
certain papers are received from his former prison in Siberia, and
those are now on the way. His friends write to me to hasten and rescue
him."

"But how did they ever get your address?"

"That's easy, though you wouldn't think so. It seems, so the letter
explains, that as soon as Mr. Petrofsky got acquainted with us he wrote
to friends in St. Petersburg, giving my address, and telling them, in
case anything ever happened to him, to notify us. You see he suspected
that something might, after he found he was being shadowed that way.

"And it all worked out. As soon as his friends heard that he was
caught, and learned where he was being held, they wrote to me. Hurrah,
Ned! A clew at last! Now to wire the detective--no, hold on, we'll go
there and rescue him ourselves! We'll go in the airship, and pick up
Detective Trivett in New York."

"That's the stuff! I'm with you!"

"Bless my suspender buttons! So am I, whatever it is!" cried Mr. Damon,
entering the room at that moment.




CHAPTER VI

RESCUING MR. PETROFSKY


"We ought to be somewhere near the place now, Tom."

"I think we are, Ned. But you know I'm not going too close in this
airship."

"Bless my silk hat!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "I hope we don't have to walk
very far in such a deserted country as this, Tom Swift."

"We'll have to walk a little way, Mr. Damon," replied the young
inventor. "If I go too close to the hut they'll see the airship, and as
those spies probably know that Mr. Petrofsky has been dealing with me,
They'd smell a rat at once, and run away, taking him with them, and
we'd have all our work to do over again."

"That's right," agreed Detective Trivett, who was one of the four in
the airship that was now hovering over the Atlantic coast, about ten
miles below the summer resorts of which Asbury Park was one.

It was only a few hours after Tom had received the letter from Russia
informing him of the whereabouts of the kidnapped Russian, and he had
acted at once.

His father sanctioned the plan of going to the rescue in one of Tom's
several airships and, Mr. Damon, having been on hand, at once agreed to
go. Of course Ned went along, and they had picked up the private
detective in New York, where he was vainly seeking a clew to the
whereabouts of Mr. Petrofsky.

Now the young inventor and his friends were hovering over the sandy
stretch of coast that extends from Sandy Hook down the Atlantic
seaboard. They were looking for a small fishing hamlet on the outskirts
of which, so the Russian letter stated, was situated the lonely hut in
which Mr. Petrofsky was held a prisoner.

"Do you think you can pick it out from a distance, Tom?" asked Mr.
Damon, as the airship floated slowly along. It was not the big one they
intended taking on their trip to Siberia, but it was sufficiently large
to accommodate the four and leave room for Mr. Petrofsky, should they
succeed in rescuing him.

"I think so," answered the young inventor.

In the letter from Russia a comparatively accurate description of the
prisoner's hut had been given, and also some details about his guards.
For there is little goes on in political circles in the realm of the
Czar that is not known either to the spies of the government or those
of the opposition, and the latter had furnished Tom with reliable
information.

"That looks like the place," said Tom at length, when, after peering
steadily through a powerful telescope, during which time Ned steered
the ship, the young inventor "picked up" a fishing settlement. "There
is the big fish house, spoken of in the letter," he went on, "and the
Russians know a lot about fish. That house makes a good landmark. We'll
go down now, before they have a chance to see us."

The others thought this a good idea, and a little later the airship
sank to the ground amid a lonely stretch of sand dunes, about two miles
from the hamlet on the outskirts of which the prison hut was said to be
located.

"Now," said Tom, "we've got to decide on a plan of campaign. It won't
do for all of us to go to the hut and make the rescue. Some one has got
to stay with the airship, to be ready to start it off as soon as we
come back with Mr. Petrofsky--if we do come.

"Then there's no use in me staying here," spoke Detective Trivett. "I
don't know enough even to turn on the gasolene."

"No, it's got to be Ned or me," said the young inventor.

"I'll stay," volunteered Ned quickly, for though he would very much
have liked to be in at the rescue, he realized that his place was in
the airship, as Mr. Damon was not sufficiently familiar with the
machinery to operate it.

Accordingly, after looking to everything to see that it was in working
order, Tom led the advance. It was just getting dusk, and they figured
on getting to the hut after dark.

"Have everything ready for a quick start," Tom said to Ned, "for we may
come back running."

"I will," was the prompt answer, and then, getting their bearings, the
little party set off.

They had to travel over a stretch of sandy waste that ran along the
beach. Back in shore were a few scattered cottages, and not yet opened
for the summer, and on the ocean side was the pounding surf. The hut,
as Tom recalled the directions, lay just beyond a group of stunted
hemlock trees that set a little way back from the ocean, on a bluff
overlooking the sea. It was not near any other building.

Slowly, and avoiding going any nearer the other houses than they could
help, the little party made its way. They had to depend on their own
judgement now, for the minor details of the location of the hut could
not be given in the letter from Russia. In fact the spies themselves,
in writing to their head officers about the matter, had not described
the location in detail.

"That looks like it over there," said Tom at last, when they had gone
about a mile and a half, and saw a lonely hut with a light burning in
it.

Cautiously they approached and, as they drew nearer, they saw that the
light came through the window of a small hut.

"Looks like the place," commented the detective.

"We'll have a look," remarked Tom.

He crept up so he could glance in the window, and no sooner had he
peered in, than he motioned for the others to approach.

Looking under a partly-drawn curtain, Mr. Damon and Mr. Trivett saw the
Russian whom they sought. He was seated at a table, his head bowed on
his hands, and in the room were three men. A rifle stood in one corner,
near one of the guards.

"They're taking no chances," whispered Mr. Damon. "What shall we do,
Tom?"

"It's three to three," replied the young inventor. "But if we can get
him away without a fight, so much the better. I think I have it. I'll
go up to the door, knock and make quite a racket, and demand admittance
in the name of the Czar. That will startle them, and they may all three
rush to answer. Mr. Damon, you and the detective will stay by the
window. As soon as you see the men rush for the door, smash in the
window with a piece of driftwood and call to Mr. Petrofsky to jump out
that way. Then you can run with him toward the airship, and I'll
follow.  It may work."

"I don't see why it wouldn't," declared the detective. "Go ahead, Tom.
We're ready."

Looking in once more, to make sure that the guards were not aware of
the presence of the rescuing party, Tom went to the front door of the
hut.  It was a small building, evidently one used by fishermen.

Tom knocked loudly on the portal, at the same time crying out in a
voice that he strove to make as deep and menacing as possible:

"Open! Open in the name of the Czar!"

Looking through the window, ready to act on the instant, Mr. Damon and
the detective saw the three guards spring to their feet. One remained
near Mr. Petrofsky, who also leaped up.

"Now!" called the detective to his companion. "Smash the window!"

The next instant a big piece of driftwood crashed through the casement,
just as the two men were hurrying to the front door to answer Tom's
summons.

"Mr. Petrofsky! This way!" yelled Mr. Damon, sticking his head in
through the broken sash. "Come out! We've come to save you! Bless my
putty blower, but this is great! Come on!"

For a moment the exile stared at the head thrust through the broken
window, and he listened to Tom's emphatic knocks and demands. Then with
a cry of delight the Russian sprang for the open casement, while the
guard that had remained near him made a leap to catch him, crying out:

"Betrayed! Betrayed! It's the Nihilists! Look out, comrades!"




CHAPTER VII

THE AIR GLIDER


Mr. Damon continued to hammer away at the window sash with the piece of
driftwood. There were splinters of the frame and jagged pieces of glass
sticking out, making it dangerous for the exile to slip through.

"Come on! Come on!" the eccentric man continued to call. "Bless my
safety valve! We'll save you! Come on!"

Mr. Petrofsky was leaping across the room, just ahead of the one guard.
The other two were at the open door now, through which Tom could be
seen. Then the spies, realizing in an instant that they had been
deceived, made a dash after their comrade, who had his hand on the
tails of the exile's coat.

"Break away! Break loose!" cried Mr. Damon, who, by this time had
cleared the window so a person could get through. "Don't let them hold
you!"

"I don't intend to!" retorted Mr. Petrofsky, and he swerved suddenly,
tearing his coat, from the grasp of the guard.

In another instant the exile was at the casement, and was being helped
through by Mr. Damon, and there was need of it, for the three guards
were there now, doing their best to keep their prisoner.

"Pull away! Pull away!" cried Mr. Damon.

"We'll help you!" shouted Tom, who, now that his trick had worked, had
sped around to the other side of the hut.

"Don't be afraid, we're with you!" exclaimed the detective, who was
with the young inventor.

"Grab him! Keep him! Hold him!" fairly screamed the rearmost of the
three guards. "It is a plot of the Nihilists to rescue him. Shoot him,
comrades. He must not get away!"

"Don't you try any of your shooting games, or I'll take a hand in it!"
shouted the detective, and, at the same moment he drew his revolver and
fired harmlessly in the air.

"A bomb! A bomb!", yelled the guards in terror.

"Not yet, but there may be!" murmured Tom. The firing of the shot
produced a good effect, for the three men who were trying to detain
Ivan Petrofsky at once fell back from the window and gave him just the
chance needed. He scrambled through, with the aid of Mr. Damon, and
before the guards could again spring at him, which they did when the
echoes of the shot had died away. They had realized, too late, that it
was not a bomb, and that there was no immediate danger for them.

"Come on!" cried Tom. "Make for the airship! We've got to get the start
of them!"

Leading the way, he sprinted toward the road that led to the place
where the airship awaited them. He was followed by Mr. Damon and the
detective, who had Mr. Petrofsky between them.

"Are you all right?" Tom called back to the exile. "Are you hurt? Can
you run?"

"I'm all right," was the reassuring answer. "Go ahead; But they'll be
right after us."

"Maybe they'll stop when they see this," remarked the detective
significantly, and he held his revolver so that the rays of the
newly-risen moon glinted on it.

"Here they come!" cried Tom a moment later, as three figures, one after
the other, came around the corner of the house. They had not taken the
shorter route through the window, as had Mr. Petrofsky, and this gained
a little time for our friends.

"Stop! Hold on!" cried one of the guards in fairly good English. "That
is our prisoner."

"Not any more!" the young inventor yelled back. "He's ours now."

"Look out! They're going to shoot!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my
gunpowder! can't you stop them some way or other, Mr. Detective?"

"The only way is by firing first," answered Mr. Trivett, "and I don't
want to hurt them. Guess I'll fire in the air again."

He did, and the guards halted. They seemed to be holding a
consultation, as Tom learned by glancing hastily back, and he caught
the glisten of some weapon. But if the three men had any notion of
firing they gave it up, and once more came on running. Doubtless they
had orders to get their prisoner back to Russia alive, and did not want
to take any chances of hitting him.

"Leg it!" cried Tom. "Leg it!"

He was well ahead, and wanted the others to catch up to him, but none
of the men was a good runner, and Mr. Petrofsky, by reason of being
rather heavily built, was worse than the other two, so they had to
accommodate their pace to his.

"I wonder if we can make it," mused Tom, as he realized that the
airship was a good distance off yet the guards, though quite a way in
the rear now were coming on fast. "It's going to be a close race,"
thought the young inventor. "I wish we'd brought the airship a little
nearer."

It was indeed a race now, for the guards, seeming to know that they
would not be shot at, were coming on more confidently, and were rapidly
lessening the distance that separated them from their recent prisoner.

"We've got to go faster!" cried Tom.

"Bless my shoe leather!" yelled Mr. Damon. "I can't go any faster."

Still he did make the attempt, and so did the exile and the detective.
Little was said now, for each of the parties was running a dogged race,
and in silence. They had gone possibly half a mile, and the first
advantage of Tom and his friends was rapidly being lost, when suddenly
there sounded in the air above a curious throbbing noise.

"Bless my gasolene! What's that?" cried Mr. Damon.

"The airship! It's the airship!" yelled Tom, as he saw a great dark
shape slowly approaching. "Ned is bringing her to meet us."

"Good!" cried the detective. "We need it I'm about winded!"

"This way, Ned! This way!" cried Tom, and, an instant later, they were
in the midst of a brilliant glow, for Ned had turned the current into
the great searchlight on the bow of the air craft, and the beams were
focused on our friends. Ned could now see the refugees, and in a moment
he sent the graceful craft down, bringing it to a halt on the ground
near Tom.

"In with you!" cried the lad. "She's all ready to start up again!"

"Come on!" yelled Tom to the others. "We're all right now, if you
hustle!"

"Bless my pin cushion!" gasped Mr. Damon, making a final spurt.

The three guards had halted in confusion on seeing the big, black bulk
of the airship, and when they noted the gleaming of the searchlight
they must have realized that their chances were gone. They made a rush,
however, but it was too late. Over the side of the craft scrambled Tom,
Mr. Damon, the detective and Ivan Petrofsky, and an instant later Ned
had sent it aloft. The race was over, and the young inventor and his
friends had won.

"You're the stuff!" cried Tom to Ned, as he went with his chum to the
pilot house to direct the progress of the airship. "It's lucky you came
for us. We never could have made the distance. We left the ship too far
off."

"That's what I thought after you'd gone," replied his chum. "So I
decided to come and meet you. I had to go slowly so as not to pass you
in the darkness."

They were speeding off now, and Ned, turning the beams of the great
searchlight below them, picked up the three guards who were gazing
helplessly aloft after their fast disappearing prisoner.

"You're having your first ride in an airship, Mr. Petrofsky," remarked
Tom, when they had gone on for some little distance. "How do you like
it?"

"I'm so excited I hardly know, but it's quite a sensation. But how in
the world did you ever find me to rescue me?"

Then they told the story of their search, and the unexpected clew from
Russia. In turn the exile told how he had been attacked at the
breakfast table one morning by the three spies--the very men who had
been shadowing him--and taken away secretly, being drugged to prevent
his calling for help. He had been kept a close prisoner in the lonely
hut, and each day he had expected to be taken back to serve out his
sentence in Siberia.

"Another day would have been too late," he told Tom, when he had
thanked the young inventor over and over again, "for the papers would
have arrived, and the last obstacle to taking me back to Russia would
have been removed. They dared not take me out of the United States
without official documents, and they would have been forged ones, for
they intended trumping up a criminal charge against me, the political
one not being strong enough to allow them to extradite me."

"Well I'm glad we got you," said Tom heartily. "We will soon be ready
to start for Siberia."

"In this kind of a craft?"

"Yes, only much larger. You'll like it. I only hope my air glider
works."

By putting on speed, Tom was able to reach Shopton before midnight, and
there was quite an informal celebration in the Swift homestead over the
rescue of the exile. The detective, for whom there was no further need,
was paid off, and Mr. Petrofsky was made a member of the household.

"You'd better stay here until we are ready to start," Tom said, "and
then we can keep an eye on you. We need you to show us as nearly as
possible where the platinum field is."

"All right," agreed the Russian with a laugh. "I'm sure I'll do all I
can for you, and you are certainly treating me very nicely after what I
suffered from my captors."

Tom resumed work on his air glider the next day, and he had an
additional helper, for Mr. Petrofsky proved to be a good mechanic.

In brief, the air glider was like an aeroplane save that it had no
motor. It was raised by a strong wind blowing against transverse
planes, and once aloft was held there by the force of the air currents,
just like a box kite is kept up. To make it progress either with or
against the wind, there were horizontal and vertical rudders, and
sliding weights, by which the equilibrium could be shifted so as to
raise or lower it. While it could not exactly move directly against the
wind it could progress in a direction contrary to which the gale was
blowing, somewhat as a sailing ship "tacks."

And, as has been explained, the harder the wind blew the better the air
glider worked. In fact unless there was a strong gale it would not go
up.

"But it will be just what is needed out there in that part of Siberia,"
declared the exile, "for there the wind is never quiet. Often it blows
a regular hurricane."

"That's what we want!" cried Tom. He had made several models of the air
glider, changing them as he found out his errors, and at last he had
hit on the right shape and size.

Midway of the big glider, on which work was now well started, there was
to be an enclosed car for the carrying of passengers, their food and
supplies. Tom figured on carrying five or six.

For several weeks the work on the air glider progressed rapidly, and it
was nearing completion. Meanwhile nothing more had been heard or seen
of the Russian spies.

"Well," announced Tom one night, after a day's hard work, "we'll be
ready for a trial now, just as soon as there comes a good wind."

"Is it all finished?" asked Ned.

"No, but enough for a trial spin. What I want is a big wind now."




CHAPTER VIII

IN A GREAT GALE


There was a humming in the air. The telegraph wires that ran along on
high poles past the house of Tom Swift sung a song like that of an
Aeolian harp. The very house seemed to tremble.

"Jove! This is a wind!" cried Tom as he awakened on a morning a few
days after his air glider was nearly completed. "I never saw it so
strong.  This ought to be just what I want I must telephone to Mr.
Damon and to Ned."

He hustled into his clothes, pausing now and then to look out of his
window and note the effects of the gale. It was a tremendous wind, as
was evidenced by the limbs of several trees being broken off, while in
some cases frail trees themselves had been snapped in twain.

"Coffee ready, Mrs. Baggert?" asked our hero as he went downstairs. "I
haven't got time to eat much though."

In spite of his haste Tom ate a good breakfast and then, having
telephoned to his two friends, and receiving their promises to come
right over, our hero went out to make a few adjustments to his air
glider, to get it in shape for the trial.

He was a little worried lest the wind die out, but when he got outside
he noted with satisfaction that the gale was stronger than at first. In
fact it did considerable damage in Shopton, as Tom learned later.

It certainly was a strong wind. An ordinary aeroplane never could have
sailed in it, and Tom was doubtful of the ability of even his big
airship to navigate in it. But he was not going to try that.

"And maybe my air glider won't work," he remarked to himself as he was
on his way to the shed where it had been constructed. "The models went
up all right, but maybe the big one isn't proportioned right. However,
I'll soon see."

He was busy adjusting the balancing weights when Ned Newton came in.

"Great Scott!" exclaimed the lad, as he labored to close the shed door,
"this is a blow all right, Tom! Do you think it's safe to go up?"

"I can't go up without a gale, Ned."

"Well, I'd think twice about it myself."

"Why, I counted on you going up with me."

"Burr-r-r-r!" and Ned pretended to shiver. "I haven't an accident
insurance policy you know."

"You won't need it, Ned. If we get up at all we'll be all right. Catch
hold there, and shift that rear weight a little forward on the rod. I
expect Mr. Damon soon."

The eccentric man came in a little later, just as Tom and Ned had
finished adjusting the mechanism.

"Bless my socks!" cried Mr. Damon. "Do you really mean to go up to-day,
Tom?"

"I sure do! Why, aren't you going with me?" and Tom winked at Ned.

"Bless my--" began Mr. Damon, and then, evidently realizing that he was
being tested he exclaimed: "Well, I will go, Tom! If the air glider is
any good it ought to hold me. I will go up."

"Now, Ned, how about you?" asked the young inventor.

"Well, I guess it's up to me to come along, but I sure do wish it was
over with," and Ned glanced out of the window to see if the gale was
dying out. But the wind was as high as ever.

It was hard work getting the air glider out of the shed, and in
position on top of a hill, about a quarter of a mile away, for Tom
intended "taking off" from the mound, as he could not get a running
start without a motor. The wind, however, he hoped, would raise him and
the strange craft.

In order to get it over the ground without having it capsize, or
elevate before they were ready for it, drag ropes, attached to bags of
sand were used, and once these were attached the four found that they
could not wheel the air glider along on its bicycle wheels.

"We'll have to get Eradicate and his mule, I guess," said Tom, after a
vain endeavor to make progress against the wind. "When it's up in the
air it will be all right, but until then I'll need help to move it.
Ned, call Rad, will you?"

The colored man, with Boomerang, his faithful mule, was soon on hand.
The animal was hitched to the glider, and pulled it toward the hill.

"Now to see what happens," remarked Tom as he wheeled his latest
invention around where the wind would take it as soon as the
restraining ropes were cast off, for it was now held in place by
several heavy cables fastened to stakes driven in the ground.

Tom gave a last careful look to the weights, planes and rudders. He
glanced at a small anemometer or wind gage, on the craft, and noted
that it registered sixty miles an hour.

"That ought to do," he remarked. "Now who's going up with me? Will you
take a chance, Mr. Petrofsky?"

"I'd rather not--at first."

"Come on then, Ned and Mr. Damon. Mr. Petrofsky and Rad can cast off
the ropes."

The wind, if anything, was stronger than ever. It was a terrific gale,
and just what was needed. But how would the air glider act? That was
what Tom wanted very much to know.

"Cast off!" he cried to the Russian and Eradicate, and they slipped the
ropes.

The next moment, with a rush and whizzing roar, the air glider shot
aloft on the wings of the wind.




CHAPTER IX

THE SPIES


"We're certainly going up!" yelled Ned, as he sat beside Tom in the
cabin of the air glider.

"That's right!" agreed the young inventor rather proudly, as he grasped
two levers, one of which steered the craft, the other being used to
shift the weights. "We're going up. I was pretty sure of that. The next
thing is to see if it will remain stationary in the air, and answer the
rudder."

"Bless my top knot!" cried Mr. Damon. "You don't mean to tell me you
can stand still in a gale of wind, Tom Swift."

"That's exactly what I do mean. You can't do it in an aeroplane, for
that depends on motion to keep itself up in the air. But the glider is
different. That's one of its specialties, remaining still, and that's
why it will be valuable if we ever get to Siberia. We can hover over a
certain spot in a gale of wind, and search about below with telescopes
for a sign of the lost platinum mine.

"How high are you going up?" demanded Ned, for the air glider was still
mounting upward on a slant. If you ever scaled a flat piece of tin, or
a stone, you'll remember how it seems to slide up a hill of air, when
it was thrown at the right angle. It was just this way with the air
glider--it was mounting upward on a slant.

"I'm going up a couple of hundred feet at least," answered Tom, "and
higher if the gale-strata is there. I want to give it a good test while
I'm at it."

Ned looked down through a heavy plate of glass in the floor of the
cabin, and could see Mr. Petrofsky and Eradicate looking up at them.

"Bless my handkerchief!" cried Mr. Damon, when his attention had been
called to this. "It's just like an airship."

"Except that we haven't a bit of machinery on board," said Tom. "These
weights do everything," and he shifted them forward on the sliding
rods, with the effect that the air glider dipped down with a startling
lurch.

"We're falling!" cried Ned.

"Not a bit of it," answered Tom. "I only showed you how it worked. By
sliding the weights back we go up."

He demonstrated this at once, sending his craft sliding up another hill
of air, until it reached an elevation of four hundred feet, as
evidenced by the barograph.

"I guess this is high enough," remarked Tom after a bit. "Now to see if
she'll stand still."

Slowly he moved the weights along, by means of the compound levers,
until the air glider was on an "even keel" so to speak. It was still
moving forward, with the wind now, for Tom had warped his wing tips.

"The thing to do," said the young inventor, "is to get it exactly
parallel with the wind-strata, so that the gale will blow through the
two sets of planes, just as the wind blows through a box kite. Only we
have no string to hold us from moving. We have to depend on the
equalization of friction on the surfaces of the wings. I wonder if I
can do it."

It was a delicate operation, and Tom had not had much experience in
that sort of thing, for his other airships and aeroplanes worked on an
entirely different principle. But he moved the weights along, inch by
inch, and flexed the tips, planes and rudders until finally Ned, who
was looking down through the floor window, cried out:

"We're stationary!"

"Good!" exclaimed Tom. "Then it's a success."

"And we can go to Siberia?" added Mr. Damon.

"Sure," assented the young inventor. "And if we have luck we'll rescue
Mr. Petrofsky's brother, and get a lot of platinum that will be more
valuable than gold."

It would not be true to say that the air glider was absolutely
stationary. There was a slight forward motion, due to the fact that it
was not yet perfected, and also because Tom was not expert enough in
handling it.

The friction on the plane surfaces was not equalized, and the gale
forced the craft along slightly. But, compared to the terrific power of
the wind, the air glider was practically at a standstill, and this was
remarkable when one considers the force of the hurricane that was
blowing above, below and through it.

For actually that was what the hurricane was doing. It was as if an
immense box kite was suspended in the air, without a string to hold it
from moving, and as though a cabin was placed amidships to hold human
beings.

"This sure is great!" cried Ned. "Have you got her in control, Tom?"

"I think so. I'll try and see how she works."

By shifting the weights, changing the balance, and warping the wings,
the young inventor sent the craft higher up, made it dip down almost to
the earth, and then swoop upward like some great bird. Then he turned
it completely about and though he developed no great speed in this test
made it progress quarteringly against the wind.

"It's almost perfect," declared Tom. "A few touches and she'll be all
right."

"Is it all right?" asked Ivan Petrofsky anxiously, as the three left
the cabin, and Eradicate hitched his mule to the glider to take it back
to the shed.

"I see where it can be improved," he said, as they made ready to
descend. "I'll soon have it in shape."

"Then we can go to Siberia?"

"In less than a month. The big airship needs some repairs, and then
we'll be off."

The Russian said nothing, but he looked his thanks to Tom, and the
manner in which he grasped the hand of our hero showed his deep
feelings.

The glider was given several more trials, and each time it worked
better. Tom decided to change some of the weights, and he devoted all
his time to this alteration, while Ned, Mr. Damon, and the others
labored to get the big airship in shape for the long trip to the land
of the exiles.

So anxious was Tom to get started, that he put in several nights
working on the glider. Ned occasionally came over to help him, while
Mr. Damon was on hand as often as his wife would allow. Mr. Petrofsky
spent his nights writing to friends in Russia, hoping to get some clew
as to the whereabouts of his brother.

It was on one of these nights, when Tom and Ned were laboring hard,
with Eradicate to help them that an incident occurred which worried
them all not a little. Tom was adjusting some of the new weights on the
sliding rods, and called to Ned:

"I say, old man, hand me that big monkey wrench, will you. I can't
loosen this nut with the small one. You'll find it on the bench by that
back window."

As Ned went to get the tool he looked from the casement. He started,
stood staring through the glass for a moment into the outer darkness,
and then cried out:

"Tom, we're being watched! There are some spies outside!"

"What?" exclaimed the young inventor "Where are they? Who are they?"

"I don't know. Those Russian police, maybe out front, and maybe we can
catch them!"

Grabbing up the big monkey wrench, Ned made a dash for the large
sliding doors, followed by Tom who had an iron bar, and Eradicate with
a small pair of pliers.

"By golly!" cried the colored man, "ef I gits 'em I'll pinch dere noses
off!"




CHAPTER X

OFF IN THE AIRSHIP


Going from the brightly lighted shop into the darkness of the night,
illuminated as it was only by the stars, neither Tom, Ned, nor
Eradicate, could see anything at first. They had to stand still for a
moment to accustom their eyes to the gloom.

"Can you see them?" cried Tom to his chum.

"No, but I can hear them! Over this way!" yelled Ned, and then, being
able to dimly make out objects, so he would not run into them, he
started off, followed by the young inventor.

Tom could hear several persons running away now, but he could see no
one, and from the sound he judged that the spies, if such they were,
were hurrying across the fields that surrounded the shop.

It was almost a hopeless task to pursue them, but the two lads were not
the kind that give up. They rushed forward, hoping to be able to
grapple with those who had looked in the shop window, but it was not to
be.

The sound of the retreating footsteps became more and more faint, until
finally they gave no clew to follow.

"Better stop," advised Tom. "No telling where we'll end up if we keep
on running. Besides it might be dangerous."

"Dangerous; how?" panted Ned.

"They might dodge around, and wait for us behind some tree or bush."

"An' ef dat Foger feller am around he jest as soon as not fetch one ob
us a whack in de head," commented Eradicate grimly.

"Guess you're about right," admitted Ned. "There isn't much use keeping
on. We'll go back."

"What sort of fellows were they?" asked Tom, when, after a little
further search, the hunt was given up. "Could you see them well, Ned?"

"Not very good. Just as I went to get you that wrench I noticed two
faces looking in the window. I must have taken them by surprise, for
they dodged down in an instant. Then I yelled, and they ran off."

"Did you see Andy Foger?"

"No, I didn't notice him."

"Was either of them one of the spies who had Mr. Petrofsky in the hut?"

"I didn't see those fellows very well, you remember, so I couldn't say."

"That's so, but I'll bet that's who they were."

"What do you think they're after, Tom?"

"One of two things. They either want to get our Russian friend into
their clutches again, or they're after me--to try to stop me from going
to Siberia."

"Do you think they'd go to such length as that?"

"I'm almost sure they would. Those Russian police are wrong, of course,
but they think Mr. Petrofsky is an Anarchist or something like that,
and they think they're justified in doing anything to get him back to
the Siberian mines. And once the Russian government sets out to do a
thing it generally does it--I'll give 'em credit for that."

"But how do you suppose they know you're going to Russia?"

"Say, those fellows have ways of getting information you and I would
never dream of. Why, didn't you read the other day how some fellow who
was supposed to be one of the worst Anarchists ever, high up in making
bombs, plotting, and all that sort of thing--turned out to be a police
spy? They get their information that way. I shouldn't be surprised but
what some of the very people whom Mr. Petrofsky thinks are his friends
are spies, and they send word to headquarters of every move he makes."

"Why don't you warn him?"

"He knows it as well as I do. The trouble is you can't tell who the
spies are until it's too late. I'm glad I'm not mixed up in that sort
of thing. If I can get to Siberia, help Mr. Petrofsky rescue his
brother, and get hold of some of that platinum I'll be satisfied. Then
I won't go back to the land of the Czar, once I get away from there."

"That's right. Well, let's go back and work on the glider."

"And we'll have Eradicate patrolling about the shop to make sure we're
not spied on again."

"By golly! Ef I sees any oh 'em, I suah will pinch 'em!" cried the
colored man, as he clicked the pliers.

But there was no further disturbance that night, and, when Tom and Ned
ceased work, they had made good progress toward finishing the air
glider.

The big airship was almost ready to be given a trial flight, with her
motors tuned up to give more power, and as soon as the Russian exile
had a little more definite information as to the possible whereabouts
of his brother, they could start.

In the days that followed Tom and his friends worked hard. The air
glider was made as nearly perfect as any machine is, and in a fairly
stiff gale, that blew up about a week later, Tom did some things in it
that made his friends open their eyes. The young inventor had it under
nearly as good control as he had his dirigible balloons or aeroplanes.

The big airship, too, was made ready for the long voyage, extra large
storage tanks for gasolene being built in, as it was doubtful if they
could get a supply in Siberia without arranging for it in advance, and
this they did not want to do. Besides there was the long ocean flight
to provide for.

"But if worst comes to worst I can burn kerosene in my motor," Tom
explained, for he had perfected an attachment to this end. "You can get
kerosene almost anywhere in Russia."

At last word was received from Russia, from some Revolutionist friends
of the exile, stating that his brother was supposed to be working in a
certain sulphur mine north of the Iablonnoi mountains, and half way
between that range and the city of Iakutsk.

"But it might be a salt mine, just as well," said Mr. Petrofsky, when
he told the boys the news. "Information about the poor exiles is hard
to get."

"Well, we'll take a chance!" cried Tom determinedly.

The preparations went on, and by strict watchfulness none of the spies
secured admission to the shop where the air glider was being finished.
The big airship was gotten in shape for the voyage, and then, after a
final trial of the glider, it was taken apart and put aboard the
Falcon, ready for use on the gale-swept plains of Siberia.

The last of the stores, provisions and supplies were put in the big car
of the airship, a route had been carefully mapped out, and Tom, after
saying good-bye to Mary Nestor, his father, the housekeeper, and
Eradicate, took his place in the pilot house of the airship one
pleasant morning at the beginning of Summer.

"Don't you wish you were going, Rad?" the young inventor asked, for the
colored man had decided to stay at home.

"No indeedy, Massa Tom," was the answer. "Dat's a mighty cold country
in Shebeara, an' I laik warm wedder."

"Well, take care of yourself and Boomerang," answered Tom with a laugh.
Then he pulled the lever that sent a supply of gas into the big bag,
and the ship began to rise.

"I guess we've given those spies the slip," remarked Ned, as they rose
from the ground calling good-byes to the friends they left behind.

"I hope so," agreed Tom, but could he have seen two men, of sinister
looks, peering at the slowly-moving airship from the shelter of a glove
of trees, not far off, he might have changed his opinion, and so would
Ned.

Then, as the airship gathered momentum, it fairly sprang into the air,
and a moment later, the big propellers began revolving. They were off
on their long voyage to find the lost platinum mine, and rescue the
exile of Siberia.




CHAPTER XI

A STORM AT SEA


Tom had the choice of two routes in making his voyage to far-off
Siberia. He could have crossed the United States, sailed over the
Pacific ocean, and approached the land of the Czar from the western
coast above Manchuria. But he preferred to take the Atlantic route,
crossing Europe, and so sailing over Russia proper to get to his
destination. There were several reasons for this.

The water voyage was somewhat shorter, and this was an important
consideration when there was no telling when he might have an accident
that would compel him to descend. On the Atlantic he knew there would
be more ships to render assistance if it was needed, although he hoped
he would not have to ask for it.

"Then, too," he said to Ned, when they were discussing the matter, "we
will have a chance to see some civilized countries if we cross Europe,
and we may land near Paris."

"Paris!" cried Ned. "What for?"

"To renew our supply of gasolene, for one thing," replied the young
inventor. "Not that we will be out when we arrive, but if we take on
more there we may not have to get any in Russia. Besides, they have a
very good quality in France, so all told, I think the route over Europe
to be the best."

Ned agreed with him, and so did Mr. Petrofsky. As for Mr. Damon, he was
so busy getting his sleeping room in order, and blessing everything he
could think of, that he did not have time to talk much. So the eastern
route was decided on, and as the big airship, carrying our friends,
their supplies, and the wonderful air glider rose higher and higher,
Tom gradually brought her around so that the pointed nose of the gas
bag aimed straight across the Atlantic.

They were over the ocean on the second day out, for Tom did not push
the craft to her limit of speed, now they had time to consider matters
at their leisure, for they had been rather hurried on leaving.

The machinery was working as nearly to perfection as it could be
brought, and Tom, after finding out that his craft would answer equally
well as a dirigible balloon or an aeroplane, let it sail along as the
latter.

"For," he said, "we have a long trip ahead of us and we need to save
all the elevating gas we can save. If worst comes to worst, and we
can't navigate as an aeroplane any more, we can even drift along as a
dirigible. But while we have the gasolene we might as well make speed
and be an aeroplane."

The others agreed with him, and so it was arranged. Tom, when he had
seen to it that his craft was working well, let Ned take charge and
devoted himself to seeing that all the stores and supplies were in
order for quick use.

Of course, until they were nearer the land of the Czar, and that part
of Siberia where Mr. Petrofsky's brother was held as an exile, they
could do little save make themselves as comfortable as possible in the
airship. And this was not hard to do.

Naturally, in a craft that had to carry a heavy load, and lift itself
into the air, as well as propel itself along, not many things could be
taken. Every ounce counted. Still our friends were not without their
comforts. There was a well stocked kitchen, and Mr. Damon insisted on
installing himself as cook. This had been Eradicate's work but the
eccentric man knew how to do almost everything from making soup to
roasting a chicken, and he liked it. So he was allowed free run of the
galley.

Tom and Ned spent much time in the steering tower or engine room, for,
though all of the machinery was automatic, there was need of almost
constant attention, though there was an arrangement whereby in case of
emergency, the airship would steer herself in any set direction for a
certain number of hours.

There were ample sleeping quarters for six persons, a living room and a
dining saloon. In short the Falcon was much like Tom's Red Cloud, only
bigger and better. There was even a phonograph on board so that music,
songs, and recitations could be enjoyed.

"Bless my napkin! but this is great!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, about noon
of the second day, when they had just finished dinner and looked down
through the glass windows in the bottom of the cabin at the rolling
ocean below them. "I don't believe many persons have such opportunities
as we have."

"I'm sure they do not," added Mr. Petrofsky. "I can hardly think it
true, that I am on my way back to Siberia to rescue my dear brother."

"And such good weather as we're having," spoke Ned. "I'm glad we didn't
start off in a storm, for I don't exactly like them when we're over the
water."

"We may get one yet," said Tom. "I don't just like the way the
barometer is acting. It's falling pretty fast."

"Bless my mercury tube!" cried Mr. Damon. "I hope we have no bad luck
on this trip."

"Oh, we can't help a storm or two," answered Tom. "I guess it won't do
any harm to prepare for it."

So everything was made snug, and movable articles on the small exposed
deck of the airship were lashed fast. Then, as night settled down, our
friends gathered about in the cheerful cabin, in the light of the
electric lamps, and talked of what lay before them.

As Mr. Damon could steer as well as Tom or Ned, he shared in the night
watch. But Mr. Petrofsky was not expert enough to accept this
responsibility.

It was when Mr. Damon finished his watch at midnight, and called Tom,
that he remarked.

"Bless my umbrella, Tom. But I don't like the looks of the weather."

"Why, what's it doing?"

"It isn't doing anything, but it's clouding up and the barometer is
going down."

"I was afraid we were in for it," answered the young inventor. "Well,
we'll have to take what comes."

The airship plunged on her way, while her young pilot looked at the
various gages, noting that to hold her way against the wind that had
risen he would have to increase the speed of the motor.

"I don't like it," murmured Tom, "I don't like it," and he shook his
head dubiously.

With a suddenness that was almost terrifying, the storm broke over the
ocean about three o'clock that morning. There was a terrific clap of
thunder, a flash of lighting, and a deluge of rain that fairly made the
staunch Falcon stagger, high in the air as she was.

"Come on, Ned!" cried Tom, as he pressed the electric alarm bell
connected with his chum's berth. "I need you, and Mr. Damon, too."

"What's the matter?" cried Ned, awakened suddenly from a sound sleep.

"We're in a bad storm," answered Tom, "and I'll have to have help. We
need more gas, to try and rise above it."

"Bless my hanging lamp!" cried Mr. Damon, "I hope nothing happens!"

And he jumped from his berth as the Falcon plunged and staggered
through the storm that was lashing the ocean below her into white
billow of foam.




CHAPTER XII

AN ACCIDENT


For a few moments it seemed as if the Falcon would surely turn turtle
and plunge into the seething ocean. The storm had burst with such
suddenness that Tom, who was piloting his air craft, was taken
unawares.  He had not been using much power or the airship would have
been better able to weather the blast that burst with such fury over
her. But as it was, merely drifting along, she was almost like a great
sheet of paper.  Down she was forced, until the high-flying spray from
the waves actually wet the lower part of the car, and Ned, looking
through one of the glass windows, saw, in the darkness, the
phosphorescent gleam of the water so near to them.

"Tom!" he cried in alarm. "We're sinking!"

"Bless my bath sponge! Don't say that!" gasped Mr. Damon.

"That's why I called you," yelled the young inventor. "We've got to
rise above the storm if possible. Go to the gas machine, Ned, and turn
it on full strength. I'll speed up the motor, and we may be able to cut
up that way. But get the gas on as soon as you can. The bag is only
about half full. Force in all you can!

"Mr. Damon, can you take the wheel? It doesn't make any difference
which way we go as long as you keep her before the wind, and yank back
the elevating rudder as far as she'll go! We must head up."

"All right, Tom," answered the eccentric man, as he fairly jumped to
take the place of the young inventor at the helm.

"Can I do anything?" asked the Russian, as Tom raced for the engine
room, to speed the motor up to the last notch.

"I guess not. Everything is covered, unless you want to help Mr. Damon.
In this blow it will be hard to work the rudder levers."

"All right," replied Ivan Petrofsky, and then there came another
sickening roll of the airship, that threatened to turn her completely
over.

"Lively!" yelled Tom, clinging to various supports as he made his way
to the engine room. "Lively, all hands, or we'll be awash in another
minute!"

And indeed it seemed that this might be so, for with the wind forcing
her down, and the hungry waves leaping up, as if to clutch her to
themselves, the Falcon was having anything but an easy time of it.

It was the work of but an instant however, when Tom reached the engine
room, to jerk the accelerator lever toward him, and the motor responded
at once. With a low, humming whine the wheels and gears redoubled their
speed, and the great propellers beat the air with fiercer strokes.

At the same time Tom heard the hiss of the gas as it rushed into the
envelope from the generating machine, as Ned opened the release valve.

"Now we ought to go up," the young inventor murmured, as he anxiously
watched the barograph, and noted the position of the swinging pendulum
which told of the roll and dip of the air craft.

For a moment she hung in the balance, neither the increased speed of
the propellers, nor the force of the gas having any seeming effect. Mr.
Damon and the Russian, clinging to the rudder levers, to avoid being
dashed against the sides of the pilot house, held them as far back as
they could, to gain the full power of the elevation planes. But even
this seemed to do no good.

The power of the gale was such, that, even with the motor and gas
machine working to their limit, the Falcon only held her own. She swept
along, barely missing the crests of the giant waves.

"She's got to go up! She's got to go up!" cried Tom desperately, as if
by very will power he could send her aloft. And then, when there came a
lull in the fierce blowing of the wind, the elevation rudder took hold,
and like a bird that sees the danger below, and flies toward the
clouds, the airship shot up suddenly.

"That's it!" cried Tom in relief, as he noted the needle of the
barograph swinging over, indicating an ever-increasing height. "Now
we're safe."

They were not quite yet, but at last the power of machinery had
prevailed over that of the elements. Through the pelting rain, and amid
the glare of the lightning, and the thunder of heaven's artillery, the
airship forced her way, up and up and up.

Setting the motor controller to give the maximum power until he
released it, Tom hastened to the gas-generating apparatus. He found Ned
attending to it, so that it was now working satisfactorily.

"How about it, Tom?" cried his chum anxiously.

"All right now, Ned, but it was a close shave! I thought we were done
for, platinum mine, rescue of exiles, and all."

"So did I. Shall I keep on with the gas?"

"Yes, until the indicator shows that the bag is full. I'm going to the
pilot house."

Running there, Tom found that Mr. Damon and the Russian had about all
they could manage. The young inventor helped them and then, when the
Falcon was well started on her upward course, Tom set the automatic
steering machine, and they had a breathing spell.

To get above the sweep of the blast was no easy task, for the wind
strata seemed to be several miles high, and Tom did not want to risk an
accident by going to such an elevation. So, when having gone up about a
mile, he found a comparatively calm area he held to that, and the
Falcon sped along with the occupants feeling fairly comfortable, for
there was no longer that rolling and tumbling motion.

The storm kept up all night, but the danger was practically over,
unless something should happen to the machinery, and Tom and Ned kept
careful watch to prevent this. In the morning they could look down on
the storm-swept ocean below them, and there was a feeling of
thankfulness in their hearts that they were not engulfed in it.

"This is a pretty hard initiation for an amateur," remarked Mr.
Petrofsky. "I never imagined I should be as brave as this in an airship
in a storm."

"Oh, you can get used to almost anything," commented Mr. Damon.

It was three days before the storm blew itself out and then came
pleasant weather, during which the Falcon flew rapidly along. Our
friends busied themselves about many things, talked of what lay before
them, and made such plans as they could.

It was the evening of the fifth day, and they expected to sight the
coast of France in the morning. Tom was in the pilot house, setting the
course for the night run, and Ned had gone to the engine room to look
after the oiling of the motor.

Hardly had he reached the compartment than there was a loud report, a
brilliant flash of fire, and the machinery stopped dead.

"What is it?" cried Tom, as he came in on the run, for the indicators
in the pilot house had told him something was wrong.

"An accident!" cried Ned. "A breakdown, Tom! What shall we do?"




CHAPTER XIII

SEEKING A QUARREL


There was an ominous silence in the engine room, following the flash
and the report. The young inventor took in every bit of machinery in a
quick glance, and he saw at once that the main dynamo and magneto had
short-circuited, and gone out of commission. Almost instantly the
airship began to sink, for the propellers had ceased revolving.

"Bless my barograph!" cried Mr. Damon, appearing on the scene. "We're
sinking, Tom!"

"It's all right," answered our hero calmly. "It's a bad accident, and
may delay us, but there's no danger. Ned, start up the gas machine,"
for they were progressing as an aeroplane then. "Start that up, and
we'll drift along as a dirigible."

"Of course! Why didn't I think of that!" exclaimed Ned, somewhat
provoked at his own want of thought. The airship was going down
rapidly, but it was the work of but a moment to start the generator,
and then the earthward motion was checked.

"We'll have to take our chance of being blown to France," remarked Tom,
as he went over to look at the broken electrical machinery. "But we
ought to fetch the coast by morning with this wind. Lucky it's blowing
our way."

"Then you can't use the propellers?" asked Mr. Petrofsky.

"No," replied Tom, "but if we get to France I can easily repair this
break. It's the platinum bearings again. I do hope we'll locate that
lost mine, for I need a supply of good reliable metal.

"Then we'll have to land in France?" asked the Russian, and he seemed a
trifle uneasy.

"Yes," answered Tom. "Don't you want to?"

"Well, I was thinking of our safety."

"Bless my silk hat!" cried Mr. Damon. "Where is the danger of landing
there? I rather hoped we could spend some time in Paris."

"There is no particular danger, unless it becomes known that I am an
escaped exile, and that we are on our way to Siberia to rescue another
one, and try to find the platinum mine. Then we would be in danger."

"But how are they to know it?" asked Ned, who had come back from the
gas machine.

"France, especially in Paris and the larger cities, is a hot-bed of
political spies," answered Mr. Petrofsky. "Russia has many there on the
secret police, and while the objectors to the Czar's government are
also there, they could do little to help us."

"I guess they won't find out about us unless we give it away," was
Tom's opinion.

"I'm afraid they will," was the reply of the Russian. "Undoubtedly word
has been cabled by the spies who annoyed us in Shopton, that we are on
our way over here. Of course they can't tell where we might land, but
as soon as we do land the news will be flashed all over, and the word
will come back that we are enemies of Russia. You can guess the rest."

"Then let's go somewhere else," suggested Mr. Damon.

"It would be the same anywhere in Europe," replied Ivan Petrofsky.
"There are spies in all the large centres."

"Well, I've got to go to Paris, or some large city to get the parts I
need," said Tom. "Unfortunately I didn't bring any along for the dynamo
and magneto, as I should have done, and I can't get the necessary
pieces in a small town. I'll have to depend on some big machine shop.
But we might land in some little-frequented place, and I could go in to
town alone."

"That might answer," spoke the Russian, and it was decided to try that.

Meanwhile it was somewhat doubtful whether they would reach France, for
they were dependent on the wind. But it seemed to be blowing steadily
in the desired direction, and Tom noted with satisfaction that their
progress was comparatively fast. He tried to repair the broken
machinery but found that he could not, though he spent much of the
night over it.

"Hurrah!" cried Ned when morning came, and he had taken an observation.
"There's some kind of land over there."

The wind freshened while they were at breakfast and using more gas so
as to raise them higher Tom directed the course of his airship as best
he could. He wanted to get high enough so that if they passed over a
city they would not be observed.

At noon it could be seen through the glass that they were over the
outskirts of some large place, and after the Russian had taken an
observation he exclaimed:

"The environs of Paris! We must not land there!"

"We won't, if the wind holds out," remarked Tom and this good fortune
came to them. They succeeded in landing in a field not far from a small
village, and though several farmers wondered much as the sight of the
big airship, it was thought by the platinum-seekers that they would be
comparatively safe.

"Now to get the first train for Paris and get the things I need,"
exclaimed Tom. He set to work taking off the broken pieces that they
might be duplicated, and then, having inquired at an inn for the
nearest railroad station, and having hired a rig, the young inventor
set off.

"Can you speak French?" asked Mr. Petrofsky. "If not I might be of
service, but if I go to Paris I might be----"

"Never mind," interrupted Tom. "I guess I can parley enough to get
along with."

He had a small knowledge of the tongue, and with that, and knowing that
English was spoken in many places, he felt that he could make out. And
indeed he had no trouble. He easily found his way about the gay
capital, and located a machine shop where a specialty was made of parts
for automobile and airship motors. The proprietor, knowing the broken
pieces belonged to an aeroplane, questioned Tom about his craft but the
young inventor knew better than to give any clew that might make
trouble, so he returned evasive answers.

It was nearly night when he got back to the place where he had left the
Falcon, and he found a curious crowd of rustics grouped about it.

"Has anything happened?" he asked of his friends.

"No, everything is quiet, I'm glad to say," replied Mr. Petrofsky. "I
don't think our presence will create stir enough so that the news of it
will reach the spies in Paris. Still I will feel easier when we're in
the air again."

"It will take a day to make the repairs," said Tom, "and put in the new
pieces of platinum. But I'll work as fast as I can."

He and Ned labored far into the night, and were at it again the next
morning. Mr. Damon and the Russian were of no service for they did not
understand the machinery well enough. It was while Tom was outside the
craft, filing a piece of platinum in an improvised vise, that a
poorly-clothed man sauntered up and watched him curiously. Tom glanced
at him, and was at once struck by a difference between the man's attire
and his person.

For, though he was tattered and torn, the man's face showed a certain
refinement, and his hands were not those of a farmer or laborer in
which character he obviously posed.

"Monsieur has a fine airship there," he remarked to Tom.

"Oh, yes, it'll do." Tom did not want to encourage conversation.

"Doubtless from America it comes?"

The man spoke English but with an accent, and certain peculiarities.

"Maybe so," replied the young inventor.

"Is it permit to inspect the interior?"

"No, it isn't," came from Tom shortly. He had hurt his finger with the
file, and he was not in the best of humor.

"Ah, there are secrets then?" persisted the stranger.

"Yes!" said Tom shortly. "I wish you wouldn't bother me. I'm busy,
can't you see."

"Ah, does monsieur mean that I have poor eyesight?"

The question was snapped out so suddenly, and with such a menacing tone
that Tom glanced up quickly. He was surprised at the look in the man's
eyes.

"Just as you choose to take it," was the cool answer. "I don't know
anything about your eyes, but I know I've got work to do."

"Monsieur is insulting!" rasped out the seeming farmer. "He is not
polite. He is not a Frenchman."

"Now that'll do!" cried Tom, thoroughly aroused. "I don't want to be
too short with you, but I've really got to get this done. One side, if
you please," and having finished what he was doing, he started toward
the airship.

Whether in his haste Tom did not notice where he was going, or whether
the man deliberately got in his way I cannot say, but at any rate they
collided and the seeming farmer went spinning to one side, falling down.

"Monsieur has struck me! I am insulted! You shall pay for this!" he
cried, jumping to his feet, and making a rush for our hero.

"All right. It was your own fault for bothering me but if you want
anything I'll give it to you!" cried Tom, striking a position of
defense.

The man was about to rush at him, and there would have been a fight in
another minute, had not Mr. Petrofsky, stepping to the open window of
the pilot house, called out:

"Tom! Tom! Come here, quick. Never mind him!"

Swinging away from the man, the young inventor rushed toward the
airship. As he entered the pilot house he noticed that his late
questioner was racing off in the direction of the village.

"What is it? What's the matter?" he asked of the Russian. "Is something
more wrong with the airship?"

"No, I just wanted to get you away from that man.

"Oh, I could take care of myself."

"I know that, but don't you see what his game was? I listened to him.
He was seeking a quarrel with you."

"A quarrel?"

"Yes. He is a police spy. He wanted to get you into a fight and then he
and you would be arrested by the local authorities. They'd clap you
into jail, and hold us all here. It's a game! They suspect us, Tom! The
Russian spies have had some word of our presence! We must get away as
quickly as we can!"




CHAPTER XIV

HURRIED FLIGHT


The announcement of Ivan Petrofsky came to Tom with startling
suddenness. He could say nothing for a moment, and then, as he realized
what it meant, and as he recalled the strange appearance and actions of
the man, he understood the danger.

"Was he a spy?" he asked.

"I'm almost sure he was," came the answer. "He isn't one of the
villagers, that's sure, and he isn't a tourist. No one else would be in
this little out-of-the-way place but a police official. He is in
disguise, that is certain."

"I believe so," agreed Tom. "But what was his game?"

"We are suspected," replied the Russian. "I was afraid a big airship
couldn't land anywhere, in France without it becoming known. Word must
have been sent to Paris in the night, and this spy came out directly."

"But what will happen now?"

"Didn't you see where he headed for? The village. He has gone to send
word that his trick failed. There will be more spies soon, and we may
be detained or thrown into jail on some pretext or other. They may
claim that we have no license, or some such flimsy thing as that.
Anything to detain us. They are after me, of course, and I'm sorry that
I made you run such danger. Perhaps I'd better leave you, and--"

"No, you don't!" cried Tom heartily. "We'll all hang together or we'll
hang separately', as Benjamin Franklin or some of those old chaps once
remarked. I'm not the kind to desert a friend in the face of danger."

"Bless my revolver! I should say not!" cried Mr. Damon. "What's it all
about? Where's the danger?"

They told him as briefly as possible, and Ned, who had been working in
the motor room, was also informed.

"Well, what's to be done?" asked Tom. "Had we better get out our
ammunition, or shall I take out a French license."

"Neither would do any good," answered the Russian. "I appreciate your
sticking by me, and if you are resolved on that the only thing to do is
to complete the repairs as soon as possible and get away from here."

"That's it!" cried Ned. "A quick flight. We can get more gasolene here,
for lots of autos pass along the road through the village. I found that
out. Then we needn't stop until we hit the trail for the mine in
Siberia!"

"Hush!" cautioned the Russian. "You can't tell who may be sneaking
around to listen. But we ought to leave as soon as we can."

"And we will," said Tom. "I've got the magneto almost fixed!"

"Let's get a hustle on then!" urged Ned. "That fellow meant business
from his looks. The nerve of him to try to pick a quarrel that way."

"I might have told by his manner that something was wrong," commented
Tom, "but I thought he was a fresh tramp and I didn't take any pains in
answering him. But come on, Ned, get busy."

They did, with such good effect that by noon the machinery was in
running shape again, and so far there had been no evidence of the
return of the spy. Doubtless he was waiting for instructions, and
something might happen any minute.

"Now, Ned, if you'll see to having some gasolene brought out here, and
the tanks filled, I'll tinker with the dynamo and get that in running
shape," said Tom. "It only needs a little adjustment of the brushes.
Then we'll be off."

Ned started for the village where there was a gasolene depot. He fancied
the villagers regarded him rather curiously, but he did not stop to ask
what it meant. Another odd fact was that the usual crowd of curious
rustics about the airship was missing. It was as though they suspected
trouble might come, and they did not want to be mixed up in it.

Never, Ned thought, had he seen a man so slow at getting ready the
supply of gasolene. He was to take it out in a wagon, but first he
mislaid the funnel, then the straining cloth, and finally he discovered
a break in the harness that needed mending.

"I believe he's doing it on purpose to delay us," thought the youth,
"but it won't do to say anything. Something is in the wind." He helped
the man all he could, and urged him in every way he knew, but the
fellow seemed to have grown suddenly stupid, and answered only in
French, though previously he had spoken some English.

But at last Ned, by dint of hard work, got him started, and rode on the
gasolene wagon with him. Once at the anchored airship, Tom and the
others filled the reserve tanks themselves, though the man tried to
help. However he did more harm than good, spilling several gallons of
the fluid.

"Oh, get away, and let us do it!" cried Tom at last. "I know what you--"

"Easy!" cautioned Mr. Petrofsky, with a warning look, and Tom subsided.

Finally the tanks were full, the man was paid, and he started to drive
away.

"Now to make a quick flight!" cried Tom, as he took his place in the
pilot house, while Ned went to the engine room. "Full speed, Ned!"

"Yes, and we'll need it, too," said the Russian.

"Why?" asked Tom.

"Look!" was the answer, and Ivan Petrofsky pointed across the field
over which, headed toward the airship, came the man who had sought a
quarrel with Tom. And with the spy were several policemen in uniform,
their short swords dangling at their sides.

"They're after us!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my chronometer they're
after us!"

"Start the motor, Ned! Start the motor!" cried Tom, and a moment later
the hum of machinery was heard, while the police and the spy broke into
a run, shouting and waving their hands.




CHAPTER XV

PURSUED


Slowly the airship arose, almost too slowly to suit those on board who
anxiously watched the oncoming officers. The latter had drawn their
short swords, and at the sight of them Mr. Damon cried out:

"Bless my football! If they jab them into the gas bag, Tom, we're done
for!"

"They won't get the chance," answered the young inventor, and he spoke
truly, for a moment later, as the big propellers took hold of the air,
the Falcon went up with a rush, and was far beyond the reach of the
men.  In a rage the spy shook his fist at the fast receding craft, and
one of the policemen drew his revolver.

"They're going to fire!" cried Ned.

"They can't do much damage," answered Tom coolly. "A bullet hole in the
bag is easily repaired, and anywhere else it won't amount to anything."

The officer was aiming his revolver at the airship, now high above his
head, but with a quick motion the spy pulled down his companion's arm,
and they seemed to be disputing among themselves.

"I wonder what that means?" mused Mr. Damon.

"Probably they didn't want to risk getting into trouble," replied the
Russian. "There are strict laws in France about using firearms, and as
yet we are accused of no crime. We are only suspected, and I suppose
the spy didn't want to get into trouble. He is on foreign ground, and
there might be international complications."

"Then you really think he was a spy?" asked Tom.

"No doubt of it, and I'm afraid this is only the beginning of our
trouble."

"In what way?"

"Well, of course word will be sent on ahead about us, and every where
we go they'll be on the watch for us. They have our movements pretty
well covered."

"We won't make a descent until we get to Siberia," said Tom, "and I
guess there it will be so lonesome that we won't be troubled much."

"Perhaps," admitted the Russian, "but we will have to be on our guard.
Of course keeping up in the air will be an advantage but they may--"

He stopped suddenly and shrugged his shoulders.

"What were you going to say?" inquired Ned.

"Oh, it's just something that might happen, but it's too remote a
possibility to work about. We're leaving those fellows nicely behind,"
he added quickly, as though anxious to change the subject.

"Yes, at this rate we'll soon be out of France," observed Tom, as he
speeded the ship along still more. The young inventor wondered what Mr.
Petrofsky had been going to say, but soon after this, some of the
repaired machinery in the motor room needed adjusting, and the young
inventor was kept so busy that the matter passed from his mind.

The dynamo and magneto were doing much more efficient work since Tom
had put the new platinum in, and the Falcon was making better time than
ever before. They were flying at a moderate height, and could see
wondering men, women and children rush out from their houses, to gaze
aloft at the strange sight. Paris was now far behind, and that night
they were approaching the borders of Prussia, as Mr. Petrofsky informed
them, for he knew every part of Europe.

The route, as laid down by Tom and the Russian, would send the airship
skirting the southern coast of the Baltic sea, then north-west, to pass
to one side of St. Petersburg, and then, after getting far enough to
the north, so as to avoid the big cities, they would head due east for
Siberia.

"In that way I think we'll avoid any danger from the Russian police,"
remarked the exile.

For the next few days they flew steadily on at no remarkable speed, as
the extra effort used more gasolene than Tom cared to expend in the
motor. He realized that he would need all he had, and he did not want
to have to buy any more until he was homeward bound, for the purchase
of it would lead to questions, and might cause their detention.

Mr. Damon gave his friends good meals and they enjoyed their trip very
much, though naturally there was some anxiety about whether it would
have a successful conclusion.

"Well, if we don't find the platinum mine we'll rescue your brother, if
there's a possible chance!" exclaimed Tom one day, as he sat in the
pilot house with the exile. "Jove! it will be great to drop down, pick
him up, and fly away with him before those Cossacks, or whoever has
him, know what's up."

"I'm afraid we can't make such a sensational rescue as that," replied
Mr. Petrofsky. "We'll have to go at it diplomatically. That's the only
way to get an exile out of Siberia. We must get word to him somehow,
after we locate him, that we are waiting to help him, and then we can
plan for his escape. Poor Peter! I do hope we can find him, for if he
is in the salt or sulphur mines it is a living death!" and he shuddered
at the memory of his own exile.

"How do you expect to get definite information as to where he might
be?" asked Tom.

"I think the only thing to do is to get in touch with some of the
revolutionists," answered the Russian. "They have ways and means of
finding out even state secrets. I think our best plan will be to land
near some small town, when we get to the edge of Siberia. If we can
conceal the airship, so much the better. Then I can disguise myself and
go to the village."

"Will it be safe?" inquired the young inventor.

"I'll have to take that chance. It's the only way, as I am the only one
in our party who can speak Russian."

"That's right," admitted Tom with a laugh. "I'm afraid I could never
master that tongue. It's as hard as Chinese."

"Not quite," replied his friend, "but it is not an easy language for an
American."

They talked at some length, and then Tom noticing, by one of the
automatic gages on the wall of the pilot house, that some of the
machinery needed attention, went to attend to it.

He was rather surprised, on emerging from the motor compartment, to see
Mr. Damon standing on the open after deck of the Falcon gazing
earnestly toward the rear.

"Star-gazing in the day time?" asked Tom with a laugh.

"Bless my individuality!" exclaimed the odd man. "How you startled me,
Tom! No, I'm not looking at stars, but I've been noticing a black speck
in the sky for some time, and I was wondering whether it was my
eyesight, or whether it really is something."

"Where is it?"

"Straight to the rear," answered Mr. Damon, "and it seems to be about a
mile up. It's been hanging in the same place this ten minutes."

"Oh, I see," spoke Tom, when the speck had been pointed out to him.
"It's there all right, but I guess it's a bird, an eagle perhaps. Wait,
I'll get a glass and we'll take a look."

As he was taking the telescope down from its rack in the pilot house,
Mr. Petrofsky saw him.

"What's up?" asked the Russian, and the youth told him.

"Must be a pretty big bird to be seen at such a distance as it is,"
remarked Tom.

"Maybe it isn't a bird," suggested Ivan Petrofsky. "I'll take a look
myself," and, showing something of alarm in his manner, he followed Tom
to where Mr. Damon awaited them. Ned also came out on deck.

Quickly adjusting the glass, Tom focused it on the black speck. It
seemed to have grown larger. He peered at it steadily for several
seconds.

"Is it a bird?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Jove! It's another airship--a big biplane!" cried Tom, "and there
seems to be three men in her."

"An aeroplane!" gasped Ned.

"Bless my deflecting rudder!" cried Mr. Damon. "An airship in this
out-of-the-way place?" for they were flying over a desolate country.

"And they're coming right after us," added Tom, as he continued to gaze.

"I thought so," was the quiet comment of Mr. Petrofsky. "That is what I
started to say a few days ago," he went on, "when I stopped, as I
hardly believed it possible. I thought they might possibly send an
aeroplane after us, as both the French and Russian armies have a number
of fast ones. So they are pursuing us. I'm afraid my presence will
bring you no end of trouble."

"Let it come!" cried Tom. "If they can catch up to us they've got a
good machine. Come on, Ned, let's speed her up, and make them take more
of our star dust."

"Wait a minute," advised the Russian, as he took the telescope from
Tom, and viewed the ever-increasing speck behind them. "Are you sure of
the speed of this craft?" he asked a moment later.

"I never saw the one yet I couldn't pull away from, even after giving
them a start," answered the young inventor proudly. "That is all but my
little sky racer. I could let them get within speaking distance, and
then pull out like the Congressional Limited passing a slow freight."

"Then wait a few minutes," suggested Mr. Petrofsky. "That is an
aeroplane all right, but I can't make out from what country. I'd like a
better view, and if it's safe we can come closer."

"Oh, it's safe enough," declared Tom. "I'll get things in shape for a
quick move," and he hurried back to the machine room, while the others
took turns looking at the oncoming aeroplane. And it was coming on
rapidly, showing that it had tremendous power, for it was a very large
one, carrying three men.

"How do you suppose they got on our track?" asked Ned.

"Oh, we must have been reported from time to time, as we flew over
cities or towns," replied Mr. Petrofsky. "You know we're rather large,
and can be seen from a good distance. Then too, the whole Russian
secret police force is at the service of our enemies."

"But we're not over Russia yet," said Mr. Damon.

Ivan Petrofsky took the telescope and peered down toward the earth.
They were not a great way above it, and at that moment they were
passing a small village.

"Can you tell where we are?" asked the odd man.

"We are just over the border of the land of the Czar," was the quiet
answer. "The imperial flag is flying from a staff in front of one of
the buildings down there. We are over Russia."

"And here comes that airship," called Ned suddenly.

They gazed back with alarm, and saw that it was indeed so. The big
aeroplane had come on wonderfully fast in the last few minutes.

"Tom! Tom!" cried his chum. "Better get ready to make a sprint."

"I'm all ready," calmly answered our hero. "Shall I go now?"

"If you can give us a few seconds longer I may be able to tell who is
after us," remarked Mr. Petrofsky, turning his telescope on the craft
behind them.

"I can let them get almost up to us, and get away," replied Tom.

The Russian did not answer. He was gazing earnestly at the approaching
aeroplane. A moment later he took the glass down from his eye.

"It's our spy again," he said. "There are two others with him. That is
one of the aeroplanes owned by the secret police. They are stationed
all over Europe, ready for instant service, and they're on our trail."

The pursuing craft was so near that the occupants could easily be made
out with the naked eye, but it needed the glass to distinguish their
features, and Mr. Petrofsky had done this.

"Shall I speed up?" cried Tom.

"Yes, get away as fast as you can!" shouted the Russian. "No telling
what they may do," and then, with a hum and a roar the motor of the
Falcon increased its speed, and the big airship shot ahead.




CHAPTER XVI

THE NIHILISTS


From the pursuing aircraft came a series of sharp explosions that
fairly rattled through the clear air.

"Look out for bombs!" yelled Ned.

"Bless my safety match!" cried Mr. Damon. "Are they anarchists?"

"It's only their motor back-firing," cried Tom. "It's all right,
They're done for now, we'll leave them behind."

He was a true prophet, for with a continued rush and a roar the airship
of our friends opened up a big gap between her rear rudders and the
forward planes of the craft that was chasing her. The three men were
working frantically to get their motor in shape, but it was a useless
task.

A little later, finding that they were losing speed, the three police
agents, or spies, whatever they might be, had to volplane to earth and
there was no need for the Falcon to maintain the terrific pace, to
which Tom had pushed her. The pursuit was over.

"Well, we got out of that luckily," remarked Ned, as he looked down to
where the spies were making a landing. "I guess they won't try that
trick again."

"I'm afraid they will," predicted Mr. Petrofsky. "You don't know these
government agents as I do. They never give up. They'll fix their
engine, and get on our trail again."

"Then we'll make them work for what they get," put in Tom, who, having
set the automatic speed accelerator, had rejoined his companions.
"We'll try a high flight and if they can pick up a trail in the air,
and come up to us, they're good ones!"

He ran to the pilot house, and set the elevation rudder at its limit.
Meanwhile the spies were working frantically over their motor, trying
to get it in shape for the pursuit. But soon they realized that this
was out of the question, for the Falcon was far away, every moment
going higher and higher, until she was lost to sight beyond the clouds.

"I guess they'll have their own troubles now," remarked Ned. "We've
seen the last of them."

"Don't be too sure," spoke the Russian. "We may have them after us
again.  We're over the land of the Czar now, and they'll have
everything their own way. They'll want to stop me at any cost."

"Do you think they suspect that we're after the platinum?" asked Tom.

"They may, for they know my brother and I were the only ones who ever
located it, though unless I get in the exact neighborhood I'd have
trouble myself picking it out. I remember some of the landmarks, but my
brother is better at that sort of work than I am. But I think what they
are mostly afraid of is that I have some designs on the life of, say
one of the Grand Dukes, or some high official. But I am totally opposed
to violent measures," went on Mr. Petrofsky. "I believe in a campaign
of education, to gain for the down-trodden people what are their
rights."

"Do you think they know you are coming to rescue your brother?" asked
Tom.

"I don't believe so. And I hope not, for once they suspected that, they
would remove him to some place where I never could locate him."

Calmer feelings succeeded the excitement caused by the pursuit, and our
friends, speculating on the matter, came to the conclusion that the
aeroplane must have started from some Prussian town, as Mr. Petrofsky
said there were a number of Russian secret police in that country. The
Falcon was now speeding along at a considerable height, and after
running for a number of miles, sufficient to preclude the possibility
that they could be picked up by the pursuing aeroplane, Tom sent his
craft down, as the rarefied atmosphere made breathing difficult.

It was about three days after the chase when, having carefully studied
the map and made several observations through the telescope of the
Country over which they were traveling, that Ivan Petrofsky said:

"If it can be managed, Tom, I think we ought to go down about here.
There is a Russian town not far away, and I know a few friends there,
There is a large stretch of woodland, and the airship can be easily
concealed there.

"All right," agreed the young inventor, "down we go, and I hope you get
the information you want."

Flying high so as to keep out of the observation of the inhabitants of
the Russian town, the young inventor sent his craft in a circle about
it, and, having seen a clearing in the forest, he made a landing there,
the Falcon having come to rest a second time since leaving Shopton, now
several thousand miles away.

"We'll hide here for a few days," observed Tom, "and you can spend as
much time in town as you like, Mr. Petrofsky."

The Russian, disguising himself by trimming his beard, and putting on a
pair of dark spectacles, went to the village that afternoon.

While he was gone Tom, Ned and Mr. Damon busied themselves about the
airship, making a few repairs that could not very well be done while it
was in motion. As night came on, and the exile did not return, Tom
began to get a little worried, and he had some notion of going to seek
him, but he knew it would not be safe.

"He'll come all right," declared Ned, as they sat down to supper. All
about them was an almost impenetrable forest, cut here and there by
paths along which, as Mr. Petrofsky had told them, the wood cutters
drove their wagons.

It was quite a surprise therefor, when, as they were leaving the table,
a knock was heard on the cabin door.

"Bless my electric bell!" cried Mr. Damon. "Who can that be?"

"Mr. Petrofsky of course," answered Ned.

"He wouldn't knock--he'd walk right in," spoke Tom, as he went to the
door. As he opened it he saw several dark-bearded men standing there,
and in their midst Mr. Petrofsky.

For one moment our hero feared that his friend had been arrested and
that the police had come to take the rest of them into custody. But a
word from the exile reassured him.

"These are some of my friends," said Mr. Petrofsky simply. "They are
Nihilists which I am not, but--"

"Nihilists yes! Always!" exclaimed one who spoke English. "Death to the
Czar and the Grand Dukes! Annihilation to the government!"

"Gently my friend, gently," spoke Mr. Petrofsky. "I am opposed to
violence you know." And then, while his new friends gazed wonderingly
at the strange craft, he led them inside. Tom and the others were
hardly able to comprehend what was about to take place.




CHAPTER XVII

ON TO SIBERIA


"Has anything happened?" asked Tom. "Are we suspected? Have they come
to warn us?"

"No, everything is all right, so far," answered Ivan Petrofsky. "I
didn't have the success I hoped for, and we may have to wait here for a
few days to get news of my brother. But these men have been very kind
to me," he went on, "and they have ways of getting information that I
have not. So they are going to aid me."

"That's right!" exclaimed the one who had first spoken. "We will yet
win you to our cause, Brother Petrofsky. Death to the Czar and the
Grand Dukes!"

"Never!" exclaimed the exile firmly. "Peaceful measures will succeed.
But I am grateful for what you can do for me. They heard me describe
your wonderful airship," he explained to Tom, "and wanted to see for
themselves."

The Nihilists were made welcome after Mr. Petrofsky had introduced
them.  They had strange and almost unpronounceable names for the ears
of our friends, and I will not trouble you with them, save to say that
the one who spoke English fairly well, and who was the leader, was
called Nicolas Androwsky. There was much jabbering in the Russian
tongue, when Mr. Petrofsky and Mr. Androwsky took the others about the
craft, explaining how it worked.

"I can't show you the air glider," said Tom, who naturally acted as
guide, "as it would take too long to put together, and besides there is
not enough wind here to make it operate."

"Then you need much wind?" asked Nicolas Androwsky.

"The harder the gale the better she flies," answered Tom proudly.

"Bless my sand bag, but that's right!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, who, up to
now had not taken much part in the conversation. He followed the party
about the airship, keeping in the rear, and he eyed the Nihilists as if
he thought that each one had one or more dynamite bombs concealed on
his person.

"Ha!" exclaimed Mr. Androwsky, turning suddenly to the odd man. "Are
you not one of us? Do you not believe that this terrible kingdom should
be destroyed--made as nothing, and a new one built from its ashes? Are
you not one of us?" and with a quick gesture he reached into his pocket.

"No! No!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, starting back. "Bless my election
ticket!  No! Never could I throw a bomb. Please don't give me one." Mr.
Damon started to run away.

"A bomb!" exclaimed the Nihilist, and then he drew from his pocket some
pamphlets printed in Russian. "I have no bombs. Here are some of the
tracts we distribute to convert unbelievers to our cause," he went on.
"Read them and you will understand what we are striving for. They will
convert you, I am sure."

He went on, following the rest of the party, while Mr. Damon dropped
back with Ned.

"Bless my gas meter!" gasped the odd man, as he stared at the
queerly-printed documents in his hand. "I thought he was going to give
me a bomb to throw!"

"I don't blame you," said Ned in a low voice. "They look like desperate
men, but probably they have suffered many hardships, and they think
their way of righting a wrong is the only way. I suppose you'll read
those tracts," he added with a smile.

"Hum! I'm afraid not," answered Mr. Damon. "I might just as well try to
translate a Chinese laundry check. But I'll save 'em for souvenirs,"
and he carefully put them in his pocket, as if he feared they might
unexpectedly turn into a bomb and blow up the airship.

The tour of the craft was completed and the Nihilists returned to the
comfortable cabin where, much to their surprise, they were served with
a little lunch, Mr. Damon bustling proudly about from the table to the
galley, and serving tea as nearly like the Russians drink it as
possible.

"Well, you certainly have a wonderful craft here--wonderful," spoke Mr.
Androwsky. "If we had some of these in our group now, we could start
from here, hover over the palace of the Czar, or one of the Grand
Dukes, drop a bomb, utterly destroy it, and come back before any of the
hated police would be any the wiser."

"I'm afraid I can't lend it to you," said Tom, and he could scarcely
repress a shudder at the terrible ideas of the Nihilists.

"It would never do," agreed Ivan Petrofsky. "The campaign of education
is the only way."

There were gutteral objections on the part of the other Russians, and
they turned to more cheerful subjects of talk.

"What are your plans?" asked Tom of the exile. "You say you can get no
trace here of your brother?"

"No, he seems to have totally disappeared from sight. Usually we
enemies of the government can get some news of a prisoner, but poor
Peter is either dead, or in some obscure mine, which is hidden away in
the forests or mountains."

"Maybe he is in the lost platinum mine," suggested Ned.

"No, that has not been discovered," declared the exile, "or my friends
here would have heard of it. That is still to be found."

"And we'll do it, in the air glider," declared Tom. "By the way, Mr.
Petrofsky, would it not be a good plan to ask your friends the location
of the place where the winds constantly blow with such force. It occurs
to me that in some such way we might locate the mine."

"It would be of use if there was only one place of the gales," replied
the exile. "But Siberia has many such spots in the mountain
fastnesses--places which, by the peculiar formation of the land, have
constant eddys of air over them. No, the only way is for us to go as
nearly as possible to the place where my brother and I were imprisoned,
and search there."

"But what is that you said about us having to stay here, to get some
news of your brother?" asked Tom.

"I had hoped to get some information here," resumed Mr. Petrofsky, "but
my friends here are without news. However, they are going to make
inquiries, and we will have to stay here until they have an answer. It
will be safe, they think, as there are not many police in town, and the
local authorities are not very efficient. So the airship will remain
here, and, from time to time I will go to the village, disguised, and
see if any word has come."

"And we will bring you news as soon as we get it," promised Mr.
Androwsky. "You are not exactly one of us, but you are against the
government, and, therefor, a brother. But you will be one of us in
time."

"Never," replied the exile with a smile. "My only hope now is to get my
brother safely away, and then we will go and live in free America. But,
Tom, I hope I won't put you out by delaying here."

"Not a bit of it. More than half the object of our trip is to rescue
your brother. We must do that first. Now as to details," and they fell
to discussing plans. It was late that night when the Nihilists left the
airship, first having made a careful inspection to see that they were
not spied upon. They promised at once to set to work their secret
methods of getting information.

For several days the airship remained in the vicinity of the Russian
town. Our friends were undisturbed by visitors, as they were in a
forest where the villagers seldom came and the nearest wood-road was
nearly half a mile off.

Every day either Mr. Petrofsky went in to town to see the Nihilists or
some of them came out to the Falcon, usually at night.

"Well, have you any word yet?" asked Tom, after about a week had passed.

"Nothing yet," answered the exile, and his tone was a bit hopeless.
"But we have not given up. All the most likely places have been tried,
but he is not there. We have had traces of him, but they are not fresh
ones. He seems to have been moved from one mine to another. Probably
they feared I would make an attempt to rescue him. But I have not given
up. He is somewhere in Siberia."

"And we'll find him!" cried Tom with enthusiasm.

For three days more they lingered, and then, one night, when they were
just getting ready to retire, there was a knock on the cabin door. Mr.
Petrofsky had been to the village that day, and had received no news.
He had only returned about an hour before.

"Some one's knocking," announced Ned, as if there could be any doubt of
it.

"Bless my burglar alarm!" gasped Mr. Damon.

"I'll see who it is," volunteered Mr. Petrofsky, and Tom looked toward
the rack of loaded rifles, for that day a man, seemingly a wood cutter
had passed close to the airship, and had hurried off as if he had seen
a ghost.

The knock was repeated. It might be their friends, and it might be--

But Mr. Petrofsky solved the riddle by throwing back the portal, and
there stood the Nihilist, Nicolas Androwsky.

"Is there anything the matter?" asked the exile quickly.

"We have news," was the cautious answer, as the Nihilist slipped in,
and closed the door behind him.

"News of my brother?"

"Of your brother! He is in a sulphur mine in the Altai Mountains, near
the city of Abakansk."

"Where's that?" asked Tom for he had forgotten most of his Russian
geography.

"The Altai Mountains are a range about the middle of Siberia,"
explained Mr. Petrofsky. "They begin at the Kirghiz Steppes, and run
west. It is a wild and desolate place. I hope we can find poor Peter
alive."

"And this city of Abakansk?" went on the young inventor.

"It is many miles from here, but I can give you a good map," said the
Nihilist. "Some of our friends are there," he added with a half-growl.
"I wish we could rescue all of them."

"We'd like to," spoke Tom. "But I fear it is impossible. But now that
we have a clew, come on! Let's start at once! It may be dangerous to
stay here. On to Siberia!"




CHAPTER XVIII

IN A RUSSIAN PRISON


The news they had waited for had come at last. It might be a false
clew, but it was something to work on, and Tom was tired of inaction.
Then, too, even after they had started, the prisoner might be moved and
they would have to trace him again.

"But that is the latest information we could get," said Mr. Androwsky.
"It came through some of our Anarchist friends, and I believe is
reliable. Can you soon make a thousand miles in your airship?"

"Yes," answered Tom, "if I push her to the limit."

"Then do so," advised the Nihilist, "for there is need of haste. In
making inquiries our friends might incur suspicions and Peter Petrofsky
may be exiled to some other place."

"Oh, we'll get there," cried Tom. "Ned, see to the gas machine. Mr.
Damon, you can help me in the pilot house."

"Here is a map of the best route," said the Nihilist, as he handed one
to Mr. Petrofsky. "It will take you there the shortest way. But how can
you steer when high in the air?"

"By compass," explained Tom. "We'll get there, never fear, and we're
grateful for your clew."

"I never can thank you enough!" exclaimed the exile, as he shook hands
with Mr. Androwsky.

The Nihilist left, after announcing that, in the event of the success
of Tom and his friends, and the rescue of the exile from the sulphur
mine, it would probably become known to them, as such news came through
the Revolutionary channels, slowly but surely.

"Here we go!" cried the young inventor gaily, as he turned the starting
lever in the pilot house, and silently, in the darkness of the night,
the Falcon shot upward. There was not a light on board, for, though
small signal lamps had been kept burning when the craft was in the
forest, to guide the Nihilists to her, now that she was up in the air,
and in motion, it was feared that her presence would become known to
the authorities of the town, so even these had been extinguished.

"After we get well away we can turn on the electrics," remarked Tom,
"and if they see us at a distance they may take us for a meteor. But,
so close as this, they'd get wise in a minute."

Mr. Damon, who had done all that Tom needed in the starting of the
craft, went to the forward port rail, and idly looked down on the black
forest they were leaving. He could just make out the clearing where
they had rested for over a week, and he was startled to see lights
bobbing in it.

"I say, Mr. Petrofsky!" he called. "Did we leave any of our lanterns
behind us?"

"I don't believe so," answered the exile. "I'll ask Tom."

"Lanterns? No," answered the young inventor. "Before we started I took
down the only one we had out. I'll take a look."

Setting the automatic steering apparatus, he joined Mr. Damon and the
Russian. The lights were now dimly visible, moving about in the forest
clearing.

"It's just as if they were looking for something," said Tom. "Can it be
that any of your Nihilist friends, Mr. Petrofsky are--"

"Friends--no friends--enemies!" cried the Russian. "I understand now!
We got away just in time. Those are police agents who are looking for
us!  They must have received word about our being there. Androwsky and
the others never carry lights when they go about. They know the country
too well, and then, too, it leads to detection. No, those are police
spies.  A few minutes later, and we would have been discovered."

"As it is we're right over their heads, and they don't know it,"
chuckled Tom. The airship was moving silently along before a good
breeze, the propellers not having been started, and Tom let her drift
for several miles, as he did not want to give the police spies a clew
by the noise of the motor.

The twinkling lights in the forest clearing disappeared from sight, and
the seekers went on in the darkness.

"Well, we've got the hardest part of our work yet ahead of us,"
remarked Tom several hours later when, the lights having been set
aglow, they were gathered in the main cabin. There was no danger of
being seen now, for they were quite high.

"We've done pretty well, so far," commented Ned. "I think we will have
easier work rescuing Mr. Petrofsky's brother than in locating the mine.

"I don't know about that," answered the Russian. "It is almost
impossible to rescue a person from Siberia. Of course it is not going
to be easy to locate the lost mine, but as for that we can keep on
searching, that is if the air glider works, but there are so many
forces to fight against in rescuing a prisoner."

They had a long journey ahead of them, and not an easy route to follow,
but as the days passed, and they came nearer and nearer to their goal,
they became more and more eager.

They were passing over a desolate country, for they avoided the
vicinity of large towns and cities.

"I wonder when we'll strike Siberia?" mused Tom one afternoon, as they
sat on the outer deck, enjoying the air.

"At this rate of progress, very soon," answered the exile, after
glancing at the map. "We should be at the foot of the Ural mountains in
a few hours, and across them in the night. Then we will be in Siberia."

And he was right, for just as supper was being served, Ned, who had
been making observations with a telescope, exclaimed:

"These must be the Urals!"

Mr. Petrofsky seized the glass.

"They are," he announced. "We will cross between Orsk and Iroitsk. A
safe place. In the morning we will be in Siberia--the land of the
exiles."

And they were, morning seeing them flying over a most desolate stretch
of landscape. Onward they flew, covering verst after verst of
loneliness.

"I'm going to put on a little more speed," announced Tom, after a visit
to the storeroom, where were kept the reserve tanks of gasolene. "I've
got more fluid than I thought I had, and as we're on the ground now I
want to hurry things. I'm going to make better time," and he yanked
over the lever of the accelerator, sending the Falcon ahead at a rapid
rate.

All day this was kept up, and they were just making an observation to
determine their position, along toward supper time, when there came the
sound of another explosion from the motor room.

"Bless my safety valve!" cried Mr. Damon. "Something has gone wrong
again."

Tom ran to the motor, and, at the same time the Falcon which was being
used as an aeroplane and not as a dirigible, began to sink.

"We're going down!" cried Ned.

"Well, you know what to do!" shouted his chum. "The gas bag! Turn on
the generator!"

Ned ran to it, but, in spite of his quick action, the craft continued
to slide downward.

"She won't work!" he cried.

"Then the intake pipe must be stopped!" answered the young inventor.
"Never mind, I'll volplane to earth and we can make repairs. That
magneto has gone out of business again."

"Don't land here!" cried Ivan Petrofsky.

"Why not?"

"Because we are approaching a large town--Owbinsk I think it is--the
police there will be there to get us. Keep on to the forest again!"

"I can't!" cried Tom. "We've got to go down, police or no police."

Running to the pilot house, he guided the craft so that it would safely
volplane to earth. They could all see that now they were approaching a
fairly large town, and would probably land on its outskirts. Through
the glass Ned could make out people staring up at the strange sight.

"They'll be ready to receive us," he announced grimly.

"I hope they have no dynamite bombs for us," murmured Mr. Damon. "Bless
my watch chain! I must get rid of that Nihilist literature I have about
me, or they'll take me for one," and he tore up the tracts, and
scattered them in the air.

Meanwhile the Falcon continued to descend.

"Maybe I can make quick repairs, and get away before they realize who
we are," said Tom, as he got ready for the landing.

They came down in a big field, and, almost before the bicycle wheels
had ceased revolving, under the application of the brakes, several men
came running toward them.

"Here they come!" cried Mr. Damon.

"They are only farmers," said the exile. He had donned his dark glasses
again, and looked like anything but a Russian.

"Lively, Ned!" cried Tom. "Let's see if we can't make repairs and get
off again."

The two lads frantically began work, and they soon had the magneto in
running order. They could have gone up as an aeroplane, leaving the
repairs to the gas bag to be made later but, just as they were ready to
start, there came galloping out a troop of Cossack soldiers. Their
commander called something to them.

"What is he saying?" cried Tom to Mr. Petrofsky.

"He is telling them to surround us so that we can not get a running
start, such as we need to go up. Evidently he understands aeroplanes."

"Well, I'm going to have a try," declared the young inventor.

He jumped to the pilot house, yelling to Ned to start the motor, but it
was too late. They were hemmed in by a cordon of cavalry, and it would
have been madness to have rushed the Falcon into them, for she would
have been wrecked, even if Tom could have succeeded in sending her
through the lines.

"I guess it's all up with us," groaned Ned.

And it seemed to; for, a moment later, an officer and several aides
galloped forward, calling out something in Russian.

"What is it?" asked Tom.

"He says we are under arrest," translated the exile.

"What for?" demanded the young inventor.

Ivan Petrofsky shrugged his shoulders.

"It is of little use to ask--now," he answered. "It may be we have
violated some local law, and can pay a fine and go, or we may be taken
for just what we are, or foreign spies, which we are not. It is best to
keep quiet, and go with them."

"Go where?" cried Tom.

"To prison, I suppose," answered the exile. "Keep quiet, and leave it
to me. I will do all I can. I don't believe they will recognize me.

"Bless my search warrant!" cried Mr. Damon. "In a Russian prison! That
is terrible!"

A few minutes later, expostulations having been useless, our friends
were led away between guards who carried ugly looking rifles, and who
looked more ugly and menacing themselves. Then the doors of the Russian
prison of Owbinsk closed on Tom and his friends, while their airship
was left at the mercy of their enemies.




CHAPTER XIX

LOST IN A SALT MINE


The blow had descended so suddenly that it was paralyzing. Tom and his
friends did not know what to do, but they saw the wisdom of the course
of leaving everything to Ivan Petrofsky. He was a Russian, and he knew
the Russian police ways--to his sorrow.

"I'm not afraid," said Tom, when they had been locked in a large prison
room, evidently set apart for the use of political, rather than
criminal, offenders. "We're United States citizens, and once our
counsel hears of this--as he will--there'll be some merry doings in
Oskwaski, or whatever they call this place. But I am worried about what
they may do to the Falcon."

"Have no fears on that score," said the Russian exile. "They know the
value of a good airship, and they won't destroy her."

"What will they do then?" asked Tom.

"Keep her for their own use, perhaps."

"Never!" cried Tom. "I'll destroy her first!"

"If you get the chance!" interposed the exile.

"But we're American citizens!" cried Tom, "and--"

"You forget that I am not," interrupted Mr. Petrofsky. "I can't claim
the protection of your flag, and that is why I wish to remain unknown.
We must act quietly. The more trouble we make, the more important they
will know us to be. If we hope to accomplish anything we must act
cautiously."

"But my airship!" cried Tom.

"They won't do anything to that right away," declared the Russian in a
whisper for he knew sometimes the police listened to the talk of
prisoners. "I think, from what I overheard when they arrested us, that
we either trespassed on the grounds of some one in authority, who had
us taken in out of spite, or they fear we may be English or French
spies, seeking to find out Russian secrets."

They were served with food in their prison, but to all inquiries made
by Ivan Petrofsky, evasive answers were returned. He spoke in poor,
broken Russian, so that he would not be taken for a native of that
country. Had he been, he would have at once been in great danger of
being accused as an escaped exile.

Finally a man who, the exile whispered to his Companions, was the local
governor, came to their prison. He eagerly asked questions as to their
mission, and Mr. Petrofsky answered them diplomatically.

"I don't think he'll make much out of what I told him," said the exile
when the governor had gone. "I let him think we were scientists, or
pleasure seekers, airshipping for our amusement. He tried to tangle me
up politically, but I knew enough to keep out of such traps."

"What's going to become of us?" asked Ned.

"We will be detained a few days--until they find out more about us.
Their spies are busy, I have no doubt, and they are telegraphing all
over Europe about us."

"What about my airship?" asked Tom.

"I spoke of that," answered the exile. "I said you were a well-known
inventor of the United States, and that if any harm came to the craft
the Russian Government would not only be held responsible, but that the
governor himself would be liable, and I said that it cost much money.
That touched him, for, in spite of their power, these Russians are
miserably paid. He didn't want to have to make good, and if it
developed that he had made a mistake in arresting us, his superiors
would disclaim all responsibility, and let him shoulder the blame. Oh,
all is not lost yet, though I don't like the looks of things."

Indeed it began to seem rather black for our friends, for, that night
they were taken from the fairly comfortable, large, prison room, and
confined in small stone cells down in a basement. They were separated,
but as the cells adjoined on a corridor they could talk to each other.
With some coarse food, and a little water, Tom and his friends were
left alone.

"Say I don't like this!" cried our hero, after a pause.

"Me either," chimed in Ned.

"Bless my burglar alarm!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "It's an awful disgrace!
If my wife ever heard of me being in jail--"

"She may never hear of it!" interposed Tom.

"Bless my heart!" cried the odd man. "Don't say such things."

They discussed their plight at length, but nothing could be done, and
they settled themselves to uneasy slumber. For two days they were thus
imprisoned, and all of Mr. Petrofsky's demands that they be given a
fair trial, and allowed to know the nature of the charge against them,
went for naught. No one came to see them but a villainous looking
guard, who brought them their poor meals. The governor ignored them,
and Mr. Petrofsky did not know what to think.

"Well, I'm getting sick of this!" exclaimed Tom--"I wish I knew where
my airship was."

"I fancy it's in the same place," replied the exile. "From the way the
governor acted I think he'd be afraid to have it moved. It might be
damaged. If I could only get word to some of my Revolutionary friends
it might do some good, but I guess I can't. We'll just have to wait."

Another day passed, and nothing happened. But that night, when the
guard came to bring their suppers, something did occur.

"Hello! we've got a new one!" exclaimed Tom, as he noted the man. "Not
so bad looking, either."

The man peered into his cell, and said something in Russian.

"Nothing doing," remarked the young inventor with a short laugh. "Nixy
on that jabbering."

But, no sooner had the man's words penetrated to the cell of Ivan
Petrofsky, that the exile called out something. The guard started,
hastened to that cell door, and for a few seconds there was an excited
dialogue in Russian.

"Boys! Mr. Damon! We're saved!" suddenly cried out Mr. Petrofsky.

"Bless my door knob! You don't say so!" gasped the odd man. "How? Has
the Czar sent orders to release us."

"No, but somehow my Revolutionary friends have heard about my arrest,
and they have arranged for our release--secretly of course. This guard
is affiliated with the Nihilist group that got on the trail of my
brother. He bribed the other guard to let him take his place for
to-night, and now--"

"Yes! What is it?" cried Tom.

"He's going to open the cell doors and let us out!"

"But how can we get past the other guards, upstairs?" asked Ned.

"We're not going that way," explained Mr. Petrofsky. "There is a secret
exit from this corridor, through a tunnel that connects with a large
salt mine. Once we are in there we can make our way out. We'll soon be
free."

"Ask him if he's heard anything of my airship?" asked Tom. Mr.
Petrofsky put the question rapidly in Russian and then translated the
answer.

"It's in the same place."

"Hurray!" cried Tom.

Working rapidly, the Nihilist guard soon had the cell doors open, for
he had the keys, and our friends stepped out into the corridor.

"This way," called Ivan Petrofsky, as he followed their liberator, who
spoke in whispers. "He says he will lead us to the salt mine, tell us
how to get out and then he must make his own escape."

"Then he isn't coming with us?" asked Ned.

"No, it would not be safe. But he will tell us how to get out. It seems
that years ago some prisoners escaped this way, and the authorities
closed up the tunnel. But a cave-in of the salt mine opened a way into
it again."

They followed their queer guide, who led them down the corridor. He
paused at the end, and then, diving in behind a pile of rubbish, he
pulled away some boards. A black opening, barely large enough for a man
to walk in upright, was disclosed.

"In there?" cried Tom.

"In there," answered Mr. Petrofsky. He and the guard murmured their
good-byes, and then, with a lighted candle the faithful Nihilist had
provided, and with several others in reserve, our friends stepped into
the blackness. They could hear the board being pulled back into place
behind them.

"Forward!" cried the exile, and forward they went.

It was not a pleasant journey, being through an uneven tunnel in the
darkness. Half a mile later they emerged into a large salt mine, that
seemed to be directly beneath the town. Work in this part had been
abandoned long ago, all the salt there was left being in the shape of
large pillars, that supported the roof. It sparkled dully in the candle
light.

"Now let me see if I remember the turnings," murmured Mr. Petrofsky.
"He said to keep on for half an hour, and we would come out in a little
woods not far from where our airship was anchored."

Twisting and turning, here and there in the semi-darkness, stumbling,
and sometimes falling over the uneven floor, the little party went on.

"Did you say half an hour?" asked Tom, after a while.

"Yes," replied the Russian.

"We've been longer than that," announced the young inventor, after a
look at his watch. "It's over an hour."

"Bless my timetable!" cried Mr. Damon.

"Are you sure?" asked Mr. Petrofsky.

"Yes," answered Tom in a low voice.

The Russian looked about him, flashing the candle on several turnings
and tunnels. Suddenly Ned uttered a cry.

"Why, we passed this place a little while before!" he said. "I remember
this pillar that looks like two men wrestling!"

It was true. They all remembered it when they saw it again.

"Back in the same place!" mused the Russian. "Then we have doubled on
our tracks. I'm afraid we're lost!"

"Lost in a Russian salt mine!" gasped Tom, and his words sounded
ominous in that gloomy place.




CHAPTER XX

THE ESCAPE


For a space of several seconds no one moved or spoke. In the flickering
light of the candle they looked at one another, and then at the
fantastic pillars of salt all about them. Then Mr. Damon started
forward.

"Bless my trolley car!" he exclaimed. "It isn't possible! There must be
some mistake. If we'll keep on we'll come out all right. You know your
way about, don't you, Mr. Petrofsky?"

"I thought I did, from what the guard told us, but it seems I must have
taken a wrong turning."

"Then it's easily remedied," suggested Tom "All we'll have to do will
be to go to the place where we started, and begin over again."

"Of course," agreed Ned, and they all seemed more cheerful.

"And if we start out once more, and get lost again, then what?" asked
Mr. Damon.

"Well, if worst comes to worst, we can go, back in the tunnel, go to
our cells and ask the guard to come with us and show us the way went on
Tom.

"Never!" cried the exile. "It would be the most dangerous thing in the
world to go back to the prison. Our escape has probably been discovered
by this time, and to return would only be to put our heads in the
noose.  We must keep on at any cost!"

"But if we can't get out," suggested Tom, "and if we haven't anything
to eat or drink, we--"

He did not finish, but they all knew what he meant.

"Oh, we'll get out!" declared Ned, who was something of an optimist.
"You've been in salt mines before, haven't you, Mr. Petrofsky?"

"Yes, I was condemned to one once, but it was not in this part of the
country, and it was not an abandoned one. I imagine this was only an
isolated mine, and that there are no others near it, so when they
abandoned it, after all the salt was taken out, most people forgot
about it. I remember once a party of prisoners were lost in a large
salt mine, and were missed for several days."

"What happened to them?" asked Tom.

"I don't like to talk about it," replied the Russian with a shudder.

"Bless my soul! Was it as bad as that?" asked Mr. Damon.

"It was," replied the exile. "But now let's see if we can find our way
back, and start afresh. I'll be more careful next time, and watch the
turns more closely."

But he did not get the chance. They could not find the tunnel whence
they had started. Turn after turn they took, down passage after passage
sometimes in such small ones that they almost had to crawl.

But it was of no use. They could not find their way back to the
starting place, and they could not find the opening of the mine. They
had used two of the slow burning candles and they had only half a dozen
or so left. When these were gone--

But they did not like to think of that, and stumbled on and on. They
did not talk much, for they were too worried. Finally Ned gasped:

"I'd give a good deal for a drink of water."

"So would I," added his chum. "But what's the use of wishing? If there
was a spring down here it would be salt water. But I know what I would
do--if I could."

"What?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Go back to the prison. At least we wouldn't starve there, and we'd
have something to drink. If they kept us we know we could get
free--sometime."

"Perhaps never!" exclaimed Ivan Petrofsky. "It is better to keep on
here, and, as for me, I would rather die here than go back to a Russian
prison. We must--we shall get out!"

But it was idle talk. Gradually they lost track of time as they
staggered on, and they hardly knew whether a day had passed or whether
it was but a few hours since they had been lost.

Of their sufferings in that salt mine I shall not go into details.
There are enough unpleasant things in this world without telling about
that.  They must have wandered around for at least a day and a half,
and in all that while they had not a drop of water, and not a thing to
eat. Wait, though, at last in their desperation they did gnaw the
tallow candles, and that served to keep them alive, and, in a measure,
alleviate their awful sufferings from thirst.

Back and forth they wandered, up and down in the galleries of the old
salt mine. They were merely hoping against hope.

"It's worse than the underground city of gold," said Ned in hollow
tones, as he staggered on. "Worse--much worse." His head was feeling
light. No one answered him.

It was, as they learned later, just about two days after the time when
they entered the mine that they managed to get out. Forty-eight hours,
most of them of intense suffering. They were burning their last candle,
and when that was out they knew they would have the horrors of darkness
to fight against, as well as those of hunger and thirst.

But fate was kind to them. How they managed to hit on the right gallery
they did not know, but, as they made a turn around an immense pillar of
salt Tom, who was walking weakly in advance, suddenly stopped.

"Look! Look!" he whispered. "Another candle! Someone--someone is
searching for us! We are saved!"

"It may be the police!" said Ned.

"That is not a candle," spoke the Russian in hollow tones as he looked
to where Tom pointed, to a little glimmer of light. "It is a star.
Friends, we are saved, and by Providence! That is a star, shining
through the opening of the mine. We are saved!"

Eagerly they pressed forward, and they had not gone far before they
knew that the exile was right. They felt the cool night wind on their
hot cheeks.

"Thank heaven!" gasped Tom, as he pushed on.

A moment later, climbing over the rusted rails on which the mine cars
had run with their loads of salt, they staggered into the open. They
were free--under the silent stars!

"And now, if we can only find the airship," said Tom faintly, "we can--"

"Look there!" whispered Ned, pointing to a patch of deeper blackness
that the surrounding night. "What's that."

"The Falcon!" gasped Tom. He started toward her, for she was but a
short distance from a little clump of trees into which they had emerged
from the opening of the salt mine. There, on the same little plane
where they had landed in her was the airship. She had not been moved.

"Wait!" cautioned Ivan Petrofsky. "She may be guarded."

Hardly had he spoken than there walked into the faint starlight on the
side of the ship nearest them, a Cossack soldier with his rifle over
his shoulder.

"We can't get her!" gasped Ned.

"We've got to get her!" declared Tom. "We'll die if we don't!"

"But the guards! They'll arrest us!" said the exile.

An instant later a second soldier joined the first, and they could be
seen conversing. They then resumed their pacing around the anchored
craft. Evidently they were waiting for the escaped prisoners to come up
when they would give the alarm and apprehend them.

"What can we do?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I have a plan," said Tom weakly. "It's the only chance, for we're not
strong enough to tackle them. Every time they go around on the far side
of the airship we must creep forward. When they come on this side we'll
lie down. I doubt if they can see us. Once we are on hoard we can cut
the ropes, and start off. Everything is all ready for a start if they
haven't monkeyed with her, and I don't think they have. We've got room
enough to run along as an aeroplane and mount upward. It's our only
hope."

The others agreed, and they put the plan into operation. When the
Cossack guards were out of sight the escaped prisoners crawled forward,
and when the soldiers came into view our friends waited in silence.

It took several minutes of alternate creeping and waiting to do this,
but it was accomplished at last and unseen they managed to slip aboard.
Then it was the work of but a moment to cut the restraining ropes.

Silently Tom crept to the motor room. He had to work in absolute
darkness, for the gleam of a light would have drawn the fire of the
guards. But the youth knew every inch of his invention. The only
worriment was whether or not the motor would start up after the
breakdown, not having been run since it was so hastily repaired. Still
he could only try.

He looked out, and saw the guards pacing back and forth. They did not
know that the much-sought prisoners were within a few feet of them.

Ned was in the pilot house. He could see a clear field in front of him.

Suddenly Tom pulled the starting lever. There was a little clicking,
followed by silence. Was the motor going to revolve? It answered the
next moment with a whizz and a roar.

"Here we go!" cried the young inventor, as the big machine shot forward
on her flight. "Now let them stop us!"

Forward she went until Ned, knowing by the speed that she had momentum
enough, tilted the elevation rudder, and up she shot, while behind, on
the ground, wildly running to and fro, and firing their rifles, were
the two amazed guards.




CHAPTER XXI

THE RESCUE


"Have we--have we time to get a drink?" gasped Ned, when the aeroplane,
now on a level keel, had been shooting forward about three minutes.
Already it was beyond the reach of the rifles.

"Yes, but take only a little," cautioned Tom. "Oh! it doesn't seem
possible that we are free!"

He switched on a few interior lights, and by their glow the faint and
starving platinum-seekers found water and food. Their craft had,
apparently, not been touched in their absence, and the machinery ran
well.

Cautiously they ate and drank, feeling their strength come back to
them, and then they removed the traces of their terrible imprisonment,
and set about in ease and comfort, talking of what they had suffered.

Onward sped the aeroplane, onward through the night, and then Tom,
having set the automatic steering gear, all fell into heavy slumbers
that lasted until far into the next day.

When the young inventor awoke he looked below and could see
nothing--nothing but a sea of mist.

"What's this?" he cried. "Are we above the clouds, or in a fog over
some inland sea?"

He was quite worried, until Ivan Petrofsky informed him that they were
in the midst of a dense fog, which was common over that part of Siberia.

"But where are we?" asked Ned.

"About over the province of Irtutsk," was the answer. "We are heading
north," he went on, as he looked at the compass, "and I think about
right to land somewhere near where my brother is confined in the
sulphur mine."

"That's so; we've got to drop," said Tom. "I must get the gas pipe
repaired. I wish we could see over what soft of a place we were so as
to know whether it would be safe to land. I wish the mist would clear
away."

It did, about noon, and they noted that they were over a desolate
stretch of country, in which it would be safe to make a landing.

Bringing the aeroplane down on as smooth a spot as he could pick out,
Tom and Ned were soon at work clearing out the clogged pipe of the gas
generator. They had to take it out in the open air, as the fumes were
unpleasant, and it was while working over it that they saw a shadow
thrown on the ground in front of them. Startled they looked up, to see
a burly Russian staring at them.

The sudden appearance of a man in that lonely spot, his calm regard of
the lads, his stealthy approach, which had made it possible for him to
be almost upon them before they were aware of his presence, all this
made them suspicious of danger. Tom gave a quick glance about, however,
and saw no others--no Cossack soldiers, and as he looked a second time
at the man he noted that he was poorly dressed, that his shoes were
ragged, his whole appearance denoting that he had traveled far, and was
weary and ill.

"What do you make of this, Ned?" asked Tom, in a low voice.

"I don't know what to make of it. He can't be an officer, in that rig,
and he has no one with him. I guess we haven't anything to be afraid
of.  I'm going to ask him what he wants."

Which Tom did in his plainest English. At once the man broke into a
stream of confused Russian, and he kept it up until Tom held up his
hand for silence.

"I'm sorry, but I can't understand you," said the young inventor. "I'll
call some one who can, though," and, raising his voice, he summoned
Ivan Petrofsky who, with Mr. Damon, was inside the airship doing some
small repairs.

"There's a Russian out here, Mr. Petrofsky," said Tom, "and what he
wants I can't make out."

The exile was quickly on the scene and, after a first glance at the
man, hurried up to him, grasped him by the hand and at once the two
were talking such a torrent of hard-sounding words that Tom and Ned
looked at each other helplessly, while Mr. Damon, who had come out,
exclaimed:

"Bless my dictionary! they must know each other."

For several minutes the two Russians kept up their rapid-fire talk and
then Mr. Petrofsky, evidently realizing that his friends must wonder at
it, turned to them and said:

"This is a very strange thing. This man is an escaped convict, as I
once was. I recognized him by certain signs as soon as I saw him,
though I had never met him before. There are certain marks by which a
Siberian exile can never be forgotten," he added significantly. "He
made his escape from the mines some time ago, and has suffered great
hardships since. The revolutionists help him when they can, but he has
to keep in concealment and travels from town to town as best he may. He
has heard of our airship, I suppose from inquiries the revolutionists
have been making in our behalf, and when he unexpectedly came upon us
just now he was not frightened, as an ordinary peasant would have been.
But he did not know I was aboard."

"And does he know you?" asked Tom. "Does he know you are trying to
rescue your brother?"

"No, but I will tell him."

There was another exchange of the Russian language, and it seemed to
have a surprising result. For, no sooner had Ivan Petrofsky mentioned
his brother, than the other, whose name was Alexis Borious seemed
greatly excited. Mr. Petrofsky was equally so at the reply his new
acquaintance made, and fairly shouted to Tom, Ned and Mr. Damon.

"Friends, I have unexpected good news! It is well that we met this man
or we would have gone many miles out of our way. My brother has been
moved to another mine since the revolutionists located him for me. He
is in a lonely district many miles from here. This man was in the same
mine with him, until my brother was transferred, and then Mr. Borious
escaped. We will have to change our plans."

"And where are we to head for now?" asked Tom.

"Near to the town of Haskaski, where my poor brother is working in a
sulphur mine!"

"Then let's get a move on!" cried Tom with enthusiasm. "Do you think
this man will come with us, Mr. Petrofsky, to help in the rescue, and
show us the place?"

"He says he will," translated the exile, "though he is much afraid of
our strange craft. Still he knows that to trust himself to it is better
than being captured, and sent back to the mines to starve to death!"

"Good!" cried Tom. "And if he wants to, and all goes well, we'll take
him out of Russia with us. Now get busy, Ned, and we'll have this
machine in shape again soon."

While Ivan Petrofsky took his new friend inside, and explained to him
about the workings of the Falcon, Tom and Ned labored over the gas
machine with such good effect that by night it was capable of being
used. Then they went aloft, and making a change in their route, as
suggested by Mr. Borious, they headed for the desolate sulphur region.

For several days they sailed on, and gradually a plan of rescue was
worked out. According to the information of the newcomer, the best way
to save Mr. Petrofsky's brother was to make the attempt when the
prisoners were marched back from the mines to the barracks where they
were confined.

"It will be dark then," said Mr. Borious, "and if you can hover in your
airship near at hand, and if Mr. Petrofsky can call out to his brother
to run to him, we can take him up with us and get away before the
guards know what we are doing."

"But aren't the prisoners chained?" asked Tom.

"No, they depend on guards to prevent escapes."

"Then we'll try that way," decided the young inventor.

On and on they sailed, the Falcon working admirably. Verst after verst
was covered, and finally, one morning, Mr. Borious, who knew the
country well, from having once been a prisoner there, said:

"We are now near the place. If we go any closer we may be observed. We
had better remain hidden in some grove of trees so that at nightfall we
can go forth to the rescue."

"But how can we find it after dark?" asked Ned.

"You can easily tell by the lights in the barracks," was the answer. "I
can stand in the pilot house to direct you, for nearly all these exile
prisons are alike. The prisoners will march in a long line from the
mine. Then for the rescue."

It was tedious waiting that day, but it had to be done, and to Tom, who
was anxious to effect the rescue, and proceed to the place of the winds
to try his air glider, it seemed as if dusk would never come as they
remained in concealment.

But night finally approached and then the great airship went silently
aloft, ready to hover over the prison ground. Fortunately there was
little wind; and she could be used as a balloon, thus avoiding the
noise of the motor.

"The next thing I do, when I get home," remarked Tom, as they drifted
along. "Will be to make a silent airship. I think they would be very
useful."

With Mr. Borious in the pilot house, to point out the way, Tom steered
through the fast-gathering darkness. The Russian had soon become used
to the airship, and was not at all afraid.

"Can you go just where you want to, as a balloon?" asked the new guide.

"No, but almost," replied Tom. "At the last moment I've got to take a
chance and start the motor to send us just where we want to go. That's
why I think a silent airship would be a great thing. You could get up
on the enemy before he knew it."

"There are the prison barracks," said the guide a little later, his
talk being translated by Mr. Petrofsky. Below and a little ahead of
them could been seen a cluster of lights.

"Yes, that looks like a line of prisoners," remarked Ned, who was
peering through a pair of night glasses.

"Where?" asked Tom eagerly, and they were pointed out to him. He took
an observation, and exclaimed:

"There they are, sure enough. Now if your brother is only among them,
Mr. Petrofsky, we'll soon have him on board."

"Heaven grant that he may be there!" said the exile in a low voice.

A moment later, the Falcon, meanwhile having been allowed to drift as
close as possible to the dimly-seen line of prisoners, Tom set in
motion the great motor, the propeller blades heating the air fiercely.

At the sound there was a shout on the ground below, but before the
excitement had time to spread, or before any of the guards could form a
notion of what was about to take place, Tom had sent his craft to earth
on a sharp slant, closer to the line of prisoners than he had dared to
hope.

Mr. Petrofsky sprang out on deck, and in a loud voice called in Russian:

"Peter! Peter! If you are there, come here! Come quickly! It is I, your
brother Ivan who speaks. I have come to save you--save you in the
wonderful airship of Tom Swift! Come quickly and we will take you away!
Peter Petrofsky!"

For a moment there was silence, and then the sound of some one running
rapidly was borne to the ears of the waiting ones. It was followed, a
moment later, by angry shouts from the guards.

"Quick! Quick, Peter!" cried the brother, "over this way!"

For an instant only the exile showed a single electric flash light,
that his brother might see in which direction to run. The echo of the
approaching footsteps came nearer, the shouts of the guards redoubled,
and then came the sound of many men running in pursuit.

"Hurry, Peter, hurry!" cried Mr. Petrofsky, and, as he spoke in Russian
the guards, of course, understood.

Suddenly a rifle shot rang out, but the weapon seemed to have been
fired in the air. A moment later a dark figure clambered aboard the
airship.

"Peter, is it you?" cried Ivan Petrofsky, hoarsely.

"Yes, brother! But get away quickly or the whole guard will be swarming
about here!"

"Praise the dear Lord you are saved!"

"Is it all right?" cried Tom, who wanted to make sure they were saving
the right man.

"Yes! Yes, Tom! Go quickly!" called Ivan Petrofsky, as he folded his
brother in his arms. A moment later, with a roar, the Falcon shot away
from the earth, while below sounded angry cries, confused shouts and
many orders, for the guards and their officers had never known of such
a daring rescue as this.




CHAPTER XXII

IN THE HURRICANE


There was a volley of shots from the prison guards, and the flashes of
the rifles cut bright slivers of flame in the darkness, but, so rapidly
did the airship go up, veering off on a wide slant, under the skillful
guidance of Tom that the shots did no harm.

"Bless my bullet pouch!" cried Mr. Damon. "They must be quite excited."

"Shouldn't wonder," calmly observed Ned, as he went to help his chum in
managing the airship. "But it won't do them any good. We've got our
man."

"And right from under their noses, too," added Ivan Petrofsky
exultingly. "This rescue of an exile will go down in the history of
Russia."

The two exile brothers were gazing fondly at each other, for now that
the Falcon was so high, Tom ventured to turn on the lights.

A moment later the three Russians were excitedly conversing, while Tom
and Ned managed the craft, and Mr. Damon, after listening a moment to
the rapid flow of the strange language, which quite fascinated him,
hurried to the galley to prepare a meal for the rescued one, who had
been taken away before he had had a chance to get his supper.

His wonder at his startling and unexpected rescue may well be imagined,
but the joy at being reunited to his brother overshadowed everything
for the time being. But when he had a chance to look about, and see
what a strange craft he was in, his amazement knew no bounds, and he
was like a child. He asked countless questions, and Ivan Petrofsky and
Mr. Borious took turns in answering them. And from now on, I shall give
the conversation of the two new Russians just as if they spoke English,
though of course it had to be translated by Ivan Petrofsky, Peter's
brother.

If Peter was amazed at being rescued in an airship, his wonder grew
when he was served with a well-cooked meal, while high in the air, and
while flying along at the rate of fifty miles an hour. He could not
talk enough about it.

By degrees the story of how Tom and his friends had started for Russia
was told, and there was added the detail of how Mr. Borious came to be
picked up.

"But brother Ivan, you did not come all that distance to rescue me; did
you?" asked Peter.

"Yes, partly, and partly to find the platinum mine."

"What? The lost mine that you and I stumbled upon in that terrible
storm?"

"That is the one, Peter."

"Then, Tom Swift may as well return. I doubt if we can even locate the
district where it was, and if we did find it, the winds blow so that
even this magnificent ship could not weather the gales."

"I guess he doesn't understand about my air glider," said Tom with a
smile, when this was translated to him. "I wish I had a chance to put
it together, and show him how it works."

"Oh, it will work all right," replied Ned, who was very proud of his
friend's inventive ability.

"Now, what is the next thing to be done?" asked Tom, a little later
that evening, when, supper having been served, they were sitting in the
main cabin, talking over the events of the past few days. "I'd like to
get on the track of that platinum treasure."

"And we will do all in our power to aid you," said Ivan Petrofsky. "My
brother and I owe much to you--in fact Peter owes you his life; do you
not?" and he turned to him.

"I do," was the firm answer.

"Oh, nonsense!" exclaimed Tom, who did not like to be praised. "I
didn't do much."

"Much! You do not call taking me away from that place--that sulphur
mine--that horrible prison barrack with the cruel guards--you do not
call that much? My friend," spoke the Russian solemnly, "no one on
earth has done so much for me as you have, and if it is the power of
man to show you where that lost mine is, my brother and I will do so!"

"Agreed," spoke Ivan quietly.

"Then what plans shall we make?" asked Tom, after a little more talk.
"Are we to go about indiscriminately, or is there any possible way of
getting on the trail?"

"My brother and I will try and decide on a definite route," spoke Ivan
Petrofsky. "It is some time since I have seen him, and longer since we
accidently found the mine together, but we will consult each other,
and, if possible make some sort of a map."

This was done the next day, the present maps aboard the Falcon being
consulted, and the brothers comparing notes. They began to lay out a
stretch of country in which it was most likely the lost mine lay. It
took several days to do this, for sometimes one brother would forget
some point, and again the other would. But at last they agreed on
certain facts.

"This is the nearest we can come to it," said Ivan Petrofsky to Tom.
"The lost platinum mine lies somewhere between the city of Iakutsk and
the first range of the Iablonnoi mountains. Those are the northern and
southern boundaries. As for the western one, it is most likely the Lena
river, and the eastern one the Amaga river. So you see you have quite a
large stretch of country to search, Tom Swift."

"Yes, I should say I had," agreed the young inventor. "But I have had
harder tasks. Now that I know where to head for I'll get there as soon
as possible."

"And what will you do when you arrive?" asked Ned.

"Fly about in the Falcon, in ever-widening circles, starting as near
the centre of that area as possible," replied Tom. "And as soon as I
run into a steady hurricane I'll know that I'm at the place of the big
winds, and I'll get out my glider, for I'll be pretty sure to be near
the place."

"Bless my gas meter!" cried Mr. Damon. "That's the talk!"

Tom put his plan into operation at once, by heading the nose of his
craft for the desolate region mapped out by the Russian brothers.

The days that followed were filled with weary searching. It was like
the time when they had sought for the plain of the great ruined Temple
in Mexico, that they might locate the underground city of gold. Only in
this case they had no such landmark as a great Aztec ruin to guide them.

What they were seeking for was something unseen, but which could be
felt--a mysterious wind--a wind that might be encountered any time, and
which might send the Falcon to the earth a wreck.

The Russian brothers, staggering about in the storm, had seen the mine
under different conditions from what it would be viewed now. Then it
was winter in Siberia. Now it was summer, though it was not very warm.

On and on sailed the Falcon. The weather could not have been better,
but for once Tom wanted bad weather. He wanted a blow--the harder the
better--and all eyes anxiously watched the anemometer, or wind gage.
But ever it revolved lazily about in the gentle breeze.

"Oh, for a hurricane!" cried Tom.

He got his wish sooner than he anticipated. It was about two days after
this, when they were going about in a great circle, about two hundred
miles from the imaginary centre of the district in which the mine lay,
that, as Mr. Damon was getting dinner a dish he was carrying to the
table was suddenly whisked out of his hand.

"I say, what's the matter?" he cried. "Bless my--"

But he had no time to say more. The airship fairly stood on end, and
then, turning completely about, was rapidly driven in the opposite
direction, though her propellers were working rapidly.

"What's up?" yelled Ned.

"We are capsizing!" shouted Ivan Petrofsky, and indeed it seemed so,
for the airship was being forced over.

"I guess we've struck what we want!" cried Tom. "We're in a hurricane
all right! This is the place of the big wind! Now for my air glider, if
I can get the airship to earth without being wrecked! Ned, lend a hand!
We've got our work cut out for us now!"




CHAPTER XXIII

THE LOST MINE


For several moments it seemed as if disaster would overtake the little
band of platinum-hunters. In spite of all that Tom and Ned could do,
the Falcon was whipped about like a feather in the wind. Sometimes she
was pointing her nose to the clouds, and again earthward. Again she
would be whirling about in the grip of the hurricane, like some
fantastic dancer, and again she would roll dangerously. Had she turned
turtle it probably would have been the last of her and of all on board.

"Yank that deflecting lever as far down as it will go!" yelled Tom to
his chum.

"I am. She won't go any farther."

"All right, hold her so. Mr. Damon, let all the gas out of the bag. I
want to be as heavy as possible, and get to earth as soon as we can."

"Bless my comb and brush!" cried the odd man. "I don't know what's
going to become of us."

"You will know, pretty soon, if the gas isn't let out!" retorted Tom
grimly, and then Mr. Damon hastened to the generator compartment, and
opened the emergency outlet.

Finally, by crowding on all the possible power, so that the propellers
and deflecting rudders forced the craft down, Tom was able to get out
of the grip of the hurricane, and landed just beyond the zone of it on
the ground.

"Whew! That was a narrow squeak!" cried Ned, as he got out. "How'd you
do it, Tom?"

"I hardly know myself. But it's evident that we're on the right spot
now."

"But the wind has stopped blowing," said Mr. Damon. "It was only a
gust."

"It was the worst kind of a gust I ever want to see," declared the
young inventor. "My air glider ought to work to perfection in that. If
you think the wind has died out, Mr. Damon, just walk in that
direction," and Tom pointed off to the left.

"Bless my umbrella, I will," was the reply and the odd man started off.
He had not gone far, before he was seen to put his hand to his cap.
Still he kept on.

"He's getting into the blow-zone," said Tom in a low voice.

The next moment Mr. Damon was seen to stagger and fall, while his cap
was whisked from his head, and sent high into the air, almost instantly
disappearing from sight.

"Some wind that," murmured Ned, in rather awe-struck tones.

"That's so," agreed his chum. "But we'd better help Mr. Damon," for
that gentleman was slowly crawling back, not caring to trust himself on
his feet, for the wind had actually carried him down by its force.

"Bless my anemometer!" he gasped, when Tom and Ned had given him a hand
up. "What happened?"

"It was the great wind," explained Tom. "It blows only in a certain
zone, like a draft down a chimney. It is like a cyclone, only that goes
in a circle. This is a straight wind, but the path of it seems to be as
sharply marked as a trail through the forest. I guess we're here all
right. Does this location look familiar to you?" he asked of the
Russian brothers.

"I can't say that it does," answered Ivan. "But then it was winter when
we were here."

"And, another thing," put in Peter. "That wind zone is quite wide. The
mine may be in the middle, or near the other edge."

"That's so," agreed Tom. "We'll soon see what we can do. Come on, Ned,
let's get the air glider out and put her together. She'll have a test
as is a test, now."

I shall not describe the tedious work of re-assembling Tom Swift's
latest invention in the air craft line--his glider. Sufficient to say
that it was taken out from where it had been stored in separate pieces
on board the Falcon, and put together on the plain that marked the
beginning of the wind zone.

It was a curious fact that twenty feet away from the path of the wind
scarcely a breeze could be felt, while to advance a little way into it
meant that one would at once be almost carried off his feet.

Tom tested the speed of it one day with a special anemometer, and found
that only a few hundred feet inside the zone the wind blew nearly one
hundred miles an hour.

"What is it like inside, I wonder?" asked Ned.

"It must be terrific," was his chum's opinion.

"Dare you risk it, Tom?"

"Of course. The harder it blows the better the glider works. In fact I
can't make much speed in a hundred-mile wind for with us all on board
the craft will be heavy, and you must remember that I depend on the
wind alone to give me motion."

"What do you think causes the wind to blow so peculiarly here Tom?"
went on Ned.

"Oh, it must be caused by high mountain ranges on either side, or the
effects of heat and cold, the air being evaporated over a certain area
because of great heat, say a volcano, or something like that; though I
don't know that they have volcanoes here. That creates a vacuum, and
other air rushes in to fill the vacant space. That's all wind is,
anyhow, air rushing in to fill a vacuum, or low pressure zone, for you
remember that nature abhors a vacuum."

It took nearly a week to assemble the Vulture, as Tom had named his
latest craft, from the fact that it could hover in the air motionless,
like that great bird. At last it was completed and then, weights being
taken aboard to steady it, all was ready for the test. Tom would have
liked to have taken all his passengers in the glider, for it would work
better then, but the three Russians were timid, though they promised to
get aboard after the trial.

The test came off early one morning, Tom, Ned and Mr. Damon being the
only ones aboard. Bags of sand represented the others. The glider was
wheeled to the edge of the wind zone and they took their places in the
car. It was hard work for the gale, that had never ceased blowing for
an instant since they found its zone, was very strong. But the glider
remained motionless in it, for the wing planes, the rudders, and
equalizing weights had been adjusted to make the strain of the wind
neutral.

"All ready?" asked Tom, when his chum and his friend were in the
enclosed car of the glider.

"As ready as I ever shall be," answered Ned.

"Bless my suspenders! Let her go, Tom, and have it over with!" cried
the odd man.

The young inventor pulled a lever, and almost instantly the glider
darted forward. A moment later it soared aloft, and the three Russians
cheered. But their voices were lost in the roar of the hurricane, as
Tom sent his craft higher and higher.

It worked perfectly, and he could direct it almost anywhere. The wind
acted as the motive power, the bending and warping wings, and the
rudders and weights controlling its force.

"I'm going higher, and see if I can remain stationary!" yelled Tom in
Ned's ear. His chum only nodded. Mr. Damon was seated on a bench,
clinging to the sides of it as if he feared he would fall off.

Higher and higher went the Vulture, ever higher, until, all at once,
Tom pulled on another lever and she was still. There she hung in the
air, the wind rushing through her planes, but the glider herself as
still and quiet as though she rested on the ground in a calm. She
hardly moved a foot in either direction, and yet the wind, as evidenced
by the anemometer was howling along at a hundred and twenty miles an
hour!

"Success!" cried Tom. "Success! Now we can lie stationary in any spot,
and spy out the land through our telescope. Now we will find the lost
platinum mine!"

"Well, I'm not deaf," responded Ned with a smile, for Tom had fairly
yelled as he had at the start, and there was no need of this now, for
though the wind blew harder than ever it was not opposed to any of the
weights or planes, and there was only a gentle humming sound as it
rushed through the open spaces of the queer craft.

Tom gave his glider other and more severe tests, and she answered every
one. Then he came to earth.

"Now we'll begin the search," he said, and preparations were made to
that end. The Russians, now that they had seen how well the craft
worked, were not afraid to trust themselves in her.

As I have explained, there was an enclosed car, capable of holding six.
In this were stores, supplies and food sufficient for several days.
Tom's plan was to leave the airship anchored on the edge of the wind
zone, as a sort of base of supplies or headquarters. From there he
intended to go off from time to time in the wind-swept area to look for
the lost mine.

There were weary days that followed. Hour after hour was spent in the
air in the glider, the whole party being aboard. Observation after
observation was taken, sometimes a certain strata of wind enabling them
to get close enough to the earth to use their eyes, while again they
had to use the telescopes. They covered a wide section but as day after
day passed, and they were no nearer their goal, even Tom optimistic as
he usually was, began to have a tired and discouraged look.

"Don't you see anything like the place where you found the mine?" he
asked of the exile brothers.

They could only shake their heads. Indeed their task was not easy, for
to recognize the place again was difficult.

More than a week passed. They had been back and forth to their base of
supplies at the airship, often staying away over night, once remaining
aloft all through the dark hours in the glider, in a fierce gale which
prevented a landing. They ate and slept on board, and seldom descended
unless at or near the place where they had left the Falcon. Once they
completely crossed the zone of wind, and came to a calm place on the
other side. It was as wild and desolate as the other edge.

Nearly two weeks had passed, and Tom was almost ready to give up and go
back home. He had at least accomplished part of his desire, to rescue
the exile, and he had even done better than originally intended, for
there was Mr. Borious who had also been saved, and it was the intention
of the young inventor to take him to the United States.

"But the platinum treasure has me beat, I guess," said Tom grimly. "We
can't seem to get a trace of it."

Night was coming on, and he had half determined to head back for the
airship. Ivan Petrofsky was peering anxiously down at the desolate
land, over which they were gliding. He and his brother took turns at
this.

They were not far above the earth, but landmarks, such as had to be
depended on to locate the mine, could not readily be observed without
the glass. Mr. Damon, with a pair of ordinary field glasses, was doing
all he could to pick out likely spots, though it was doubtful if he
would know the place if he saw it.

However, as chance willed it, he was instrumental in bringing the quest
to a close, and most unexpectedly. Peter Petrofsky was relieving his
brother at the telescope, when the odd man, who had not taken his eyes
from the field glasses, suddenly uttered an exclamation.

"Bless my tooth-brush!" he cried. "That's a most desolate place down
there. A lot of trees blown down around a lake that looks as black as
ink."

"What's that!" cried Ivan Petrofsky. "A lake as black as ink? Where?"

"We just passed it!" replied Mr. Damon.

"Then put back there, as soon as you can, Tom!" called the Russian. "I
want to look at that place."

With a long, graceful sweep the young inventor sent the glider back
over the course. Ivan Petrofsky glued his eyes to the telescope. He
picked out the spot Mr. Damon had referred to, and a moment later cried:

"That's it! That's near the lost platinum mine! We've found it again,
Tom--everybody! Don't you remember, Peter," he said turning to his
brother, "when we were lost in the snow we crawled in among a tangle of
trees to get out of the blast. There was a sheet of white snow near
them, and you broke through into water. I pulled you out. That must
have been a lake, though it was lightly frozen over then. I believe
this is the lost mine. Go down, Tom! Go down!"

"I certainly will!" cried the youth, and pulling on the descending
lever he shunted the glider to earth.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE LEAKING TANKS


Like a bird descending from some dizzy height, the Vulture landed close
to the pool of black water. It was a small lake and the darkness must
have been caused by its depth, for later when they took some out in a
glass it was as clear as a crystal. Then, too, there might have been
black rocks on the bottom.

"Can it be possible that we are here at last?" cried Tom, above the
noise of the gale, for the wind was blowing at a terrific rate. But our
friends knew better now how to adjust themselves to it, and the lake
was down in a valley, the sides of which cut off the power of the gale.
As for the glider it was only necessary to equalize the balance and it
would remain stationary in any wind.

"This is the place! This is the place!" cried Ivan Petrofsky. "Don't
you remember, Peter?"

"Indeed I do! I have good cause to! This is where we found the
platinum!"

"Bless my soul!" cried Mr. Damon. "Where is it, in the lake?"

"The mine itself is just beyond that barrier of broken and twisted
trees," replied the elder Russian brother. "It is an irregular opening
in the ground, as though once, centuries ago, an ancient people tried
to get out the precious metal. We will go to it at once."

"But it is getting late," objected Ned.

"No matter," said Tom. "If we find any platinum we'll stay here all
night, and longer if necessary to get a good supply. This is better
than the city of gold, for we're in the open."

"I should say we were," observed Mr. Damon, as he bent to the blast,
which was strong, sheltered even as they were.

"Will it be safe to remain all night?" asked Mr. Borious, with a glance
about the desolate country.

"We have plenty of food," replied Tom, "and a good place to stay, in
the car of the glider. I don't believe we'll be attacked."

"No, not here," said the elder Petrofsky. "But we still have to go back
across Siberia to escape."

"We'll do it!" cried Tom. "Now for the platinum treasure!"

They went forward, and it was no easy work. For the wind still blew with
tremendous force though nothing like what it did higher up. And the
ground was uneven. They had to cling to each other and it was very
evident that no airship, not even the powerful Falcon, could have
reached the place. Only an air glider would answer.

It took them half an hour to get to the opening of the ancient mine,
and by that time it was nearly dark. But Tom had thought to bring
electric torches, such as he had used in the underground city of gold,
and they dispelled the gloom of the small cavern.

"Will you go in?" asked Ivan Petrofsky, when they had come to the
place.  He looked at Tom.

"Go in? Of course I'll go in!" cried our hero, stepping forward. The
others followed. For some time they went on, and saw no traces of the
precious metal. Then Ned uttered a cry, as he saw some dull, grayish
particles imbedded in the earth walls of the shaft.

"Look!" he cried.

Tom was at his chum's side in a moment.

"That's platinum!" cried the young inventor. "And of the very highest
grade! But the lumps are very small."

"There are larger ones beyond," said the younger Russian brother.

Forward they pressed, and a moment later coming around a turn in the
cavern where some earth had fallen away, evidently recently, Tom could
not repress a cry of joy. For there, in plain sight, were many large
lumps of the valuable metal, in as pure a state as it is ever found.
For it is always mixed with other metals or chemicals.

"Look at that!" cried Tom. "Look at that! Lumps as large as an egg!"
and he dug some out with a small pick he had brought along, and stuffed
them into his pocket.

"Bless my check book!" cried Mr. Damon, "and that stuff is as valuable
as gold!"

"More so!" cried Tom enthusiastically.

"Oh, here's a whopping big one!" cried Ned. "I'll bet it weighs ten
pounds."

"More than that!" cried Tom, as he ran over and began digging it out,
and they found later that it did. Platinum is usually found in small
granules, but there are records of chunks being found weighing twenty
pounds while others, the size of pigeons' eggs, are not uncommon.

"Say, this is great!" yelled Ned, discovering another large piece, and
digging it out.

"I am glad we could lead you to it," said the elder Russian brother.
"It is a small return for what you did for us!"

"Nonsense!" cried Tom. "These must be a king's ransom here. Everybody
dig it out! Get all you can."

They were all busy, but the light of the two torches Tom had brought
was not sufficient for good and efficient work, so after getting
several thousand dollars worth of the precious metal, they decided to
postpone operations until morning, and come with more lights.

They were at the work soon after breakfast, the night in the air glider
having passed without incident. The treasure of platinum proved even
richer than the Russians had thought, and it was no wonder the Imperial
government had tried so hard to locate it, or get on the trail of those
who sought it.

"And it's all good stuff!" cried Tom eagerly. "Not like that low-grade
gold of the underground city. I can make my own terms when I sell this."

For three days our friends dug and dug in that platinum mine, so many
years lost to man, and when they got ready to leave they had indeed a
king's ransom with them. But it was to be equally divided. Tom insisted
on this, as his Russian friends had been instrumental in finding it.
Toward the end of the excavation large pieces were scarce, and it was
evident that the mine was what is called a "lode."

"Well, shall we go back now?" asked Tom one day, after the finish of
their mining operations. The work was comparatively simple, as the
platinum lumps had merely to be dug out of the sides of the cave. But
the loneliness and dreariness of the place was telling on them all.

"Can't we carry any more?" asked Ned.

"We could, but it might not be safe. I don't want to take on too much
weight, as my glider isn't as stable as the airship. But we have plenty
of the metal.

"Indeed we have," agreed Ivan Petrofsky. "Much of mine and my brother's
will go toward helping relieve the sufferings of the Siberian exiles,"
he added.

"And mine, too," said Alexis Borious.

They started back early the next morning in a more terrific gale than
in any the glider had yet flown. But she proved herself a stanch craft,
and soon they were at the place where they had left the airship. It was
undisturbed.

Four days were spent in taking apart the glider and packing it on board
the Falcon. Then, with the platinum safely stored away Tom, with a last
look at the desolate land that had been so kind to them, sent his craft
on her homeward way.

It was when they were near the city of Pirtchina, on the Obi river,
that what might have proved a disastrous accident occurred. They were
flying along high, and at great speed, for Tom wanted to make all the
distance he could, to get out of Siberia the more quickly. They had had
a fair passage so far, and were congratulating themselves that they
would soon be in civilization again.

Suddenly, Mr. Damon, who had been on the after deck, taking
observations through a telescope, came running forward, crying out:

"Tom! Tom! What is that water dripping from the back part of the
airship?"

"Water?" exclaimed Tom. "No water is dripping from there."

"Come and look," advised Mr. Damon.

The young inventor raced back with him. He saw a thin, white stream
trickling down from the lower part of the craft. Tom sniffed the air
suspiciously.

"Gasolene! It's gasolene!" he cried. "We must have a leak in the supply
tanks!"

He dashed toward the reserve storeroom, and at that moment, with a
suddenness that was startling, the motor stopped and the Falcon lurched
toward the earth.




CHAPTER XXV

HOMEWARD BOUND--CONCLUSION


"All right!" yelled Ned, as soon as he heard Tom's cry. "I've got her
under control. We'll volplane down."

"Is it dangerous? Are we in danger?" asked Peter Petrofsky of his
brother, in Russian.

"I guess there's no danger, where Tom Swift's concerned," was the
answer. "I have not volplaned much, but it will be all right I think."

And it was, for with Ned Newton to guide the craft, while Tom did his
best to stop the leak, the craft came gently to earth on the outskirts
of a fairly large Siberian city. Almost instantly the Falcon was
surrounded by a curious throng.

"You had better keep inside," said Ivan Petrofsky to his brother and
Mr. Borious. "Descriptions of you are probably out broadcast by now,
but I am still sufficiently disguised, I think."

"But what is to be done?" demanded the younger Russian brother. "If the
gasolene is gone, how can we leave here?"

"Trust Tom Swift for that," was the reply. "Keep out of sight now,
there is a large crowd outside."

Tom came from the tank room. There was a despondent look on his face.

"It's all gone--every drop," he said. "That's what made the motor stop."

"What's gone?" asked Mr. Damon.

"The gasolene. We sprung a leak in the main tank, somehow, and it all
flowed out while we were flying along."

"Haven't you any more?"

"Not a bit. I was drawing on the reserve tank, hoping to get to
civilization before I needed more. But its too late now. We will have
to--"

"Bless my snow shoes!" cried Mr. Damon. "Don't say we'll have to stay
here--in Siberia! Don't say that. My wife--"

"No, we won't have to stay here if we can get a supply of kerosene,"
interrupted Tom. "The motor will burn that. The only trouble is that we
may be detained. The authorities probably know us by this time, and are
on the watch."

"Then get it before they know we are here," advised Ned.

"I'll try," said Tom, and he at once conferred with the elder
Petrofsky.  The latter said he was sure kerosene could be had in town,
and, rather than risk going in themselves, they hired a wagoner who
agreed, for liberal pay, to go and return with a quantity. Until then
there was nothing to do but wait.

Meanwhile the crowd of curiosity seekers grew. They thronged around the
airship, some of them meddling with various devices, until Tom had to
order them away with gestures.

One particularly inquisitive man insisted on pulling or twisting
everything, until he happened to touch a couple of live wires, giving
himself quite a shock, and then he ran away howling. But still the
crowd increased, and at last Mr. Petrofsky said:

"I don't like this, Tom?"

"Why not?" They were all inside the craft, looking out and waiting for
the return of the man with the kerosene. The leak in the tank had
proved to be a small one, and had quickly been soldered. It had been
open a long time, which accounted for the large amount of gasolene
escaping.  "What don't you like, Mr. Petrofsky?"

"So many men surrounding us. I believe some of them are officers
dressed in civilians' clothes, and a Russian officer never does that
unless he has some object."

"And you think the object is--?"

"To capture us."

"If it was that, wouldn't they have done it long ago--when we first
came down?"

"No, they are evidently waiting for something perhaps for some high
official, without whose orders they dare do nothing. Russia is overrun
with officialdom."

And a little later Ivan Petrofsky's suspicion proved true. There
arrived a man in uniform, who spoke fairly good English, and who
politely asked Tom if he would not delay the start of the airship,
again, until the governor could arrive from his country place to see it.

"We know you are going to leave us," said the Russian with a smile,
"for you have sent for kerosene. But please wait."

"If your governor comes soon we'll wait," replied Tom. "But we are in a
hurry. I wish that kerosene fellow would get a move on," he murmured.

"Oh, he will doubtless be here soon," said the officer. "Might I be
permitted to come aboard and wait for my chief?"

"Sorry, but it's not allowed," replied our hero, straining his eyes
down the road for a sight of the wagoner. At last he came, and Tom
breathed easier.

But the crowd was bigger, and some of the men, though poorly dressed,
seemed to be persons in authority. Tom had no doubt but what there was
a plot afoot to detain him, and arrest the exiles, and that there were
disguised soldiers in the throng. But they could not act without the
governor's orders, and he was probably on his way with all haste.

"Lively now, get that kerosene in the tanks!" cried Tom to the man,
motioning in lieu of using Russian. The youth was not going to meet the
governor if he could help it.

Now it was a curious thing, but the more that wagoner and his helpers
seemed to try to hurry, and pour the oil from the cans into the
tank-opening of the airship, the slower they worked. They got in each
others' way, dropped some cans, spilled others, and in general made
such poor work at it that Tom saw there was something in the wind.

"Ned!" he exclaimed, "they're doing all they can to detain us. We've
got to put that oil in ourselves. Just as we did the gasolene in
France.  It's the same sort of a delay game."

"Right, Tom! I'm with you."

"And I'll warn the crowd back, by telling them we are likely to blow up
any minute!" added Ivan Petrofsky, which warning he shouted in Russian
a moment later.

Backward leaped the throng, as though a bomb bad been thrown into their
midst, even the supposed officers joining in the retreat. The oil wagon
was now easy of access, and Tom and Ned, with Mr. Damon to aid them,
hastened toward it. Then the work of filling the tanks went on in
something like good old, United States fashion.

The last gallon of kerosene had been put aboard, and Tom and Ned with
Mr. Damon, had climbed on deck, when the gaily uniformed officer, who
had requested the delay, came riding up furiously.

"Hold! Hold! If you please!" he cried. "The governor has come. He wants
to see you."

"Too late!" answered Tom. "Give him our best regards and ask him to
come to the United States if he wants to see us. Sorry we haven't cards
handy. Ned, take the pilot house, and shoot her up sharp when you get
the signal. I'm going to run the motor. I don't know just how she'll
behave on the kerosene."

"You must remain!" angrily cried the officer.

"The United States doesn't take 'must' from anybody, from the Czar
down!" cried Tom as he disappeared into the motor room. The window was
open, and the youth turned on the power the official cried again to him:

"Halt! Here comes the governor! I declared you arrested by his orders,
and in the name of the Czar!"

"Nothing doing!" yelled Tom, and then, looking from the window, he saw
approaching a troop of Cossacks, in the midst of whom rode a man in a
brilliant uniform--evidently the governor.

"Stop! Stop!" cried the official.

"Here we go, Ned!" yelled Tom, and turning on more power the Falcon
arose swiftly, before the very eyes of the angry governor, and his
staff of Cossack soldiers.

Up and up she went, faster and faster, the motors working well on the
kerosene. Higher and higher. The governor and his soldiers were
directly below her now.

"Stop! Stop! You must stop. The Imperial governor orders it!" yelled
the officer, evidently his Excellency's aide-de-camp.

"We can't hear you!" shouted Tom, waving his hand from the motor room
window, and then, turning on still more power he flew over the city,
taking his friends and the valuable supply of platinum with him. So
surprised were the soldiers that they did not fire a shot, but had they
done so it is doubtful if much damage could have been done.

"And now for home!" cried Tom, and homeward hound the Falcon was after
a perilous trip through two storms. But she weathered them well.

In due season they reached Paris again, and now, having no reason for
concealment, they flew boldly down, to change what remained of the
kerosene for gasolene, as the motor worked better on that. The secret
police learned that the exiles were aboard, but they could do nothing,
as the offenses were political ones, and so Tom kept his friends safe.

Then they started on the long voyage across the Atlantic, and though
they had one bad experience in a storm over that mighty ocean, they got
safely home to Shopton in due season.

There is little more to tell. The platinum proved to be even more
valuable than Tom had expected. He could have sold it all for a large
sum, but he preferred to keep most of what he had for his inventive
work, and he used considerable of it in his machinery. Ned disposed of
his, selling Tom some at a lower price than market quotations, and the
Russians got a good price for theirs, turning the money into the fund
to help their fellow exiles. Mr. Damon also made a good donation to the
cause, as did Tom and Ned.

Mr. Petrofsky and his brother, with the other exile, joined friends in
New York, and promised to come and see Tom when they could.

"Well, I suppose you'll take a long vacation now," said Mary Nestor, to
Tom, when he called on her one evening to present her a unique ring,
with the stones set in some of the platinum he had dug in the Siberian
mine.

"Vacation? I have no time for vacations!" said the young inventor. "I'm
soon going to work on my silent airship, and on some other things I
have in mind. I want more adventures."

"Oh, you greedy boy!" exclaimed Mary with a laugh.

And what adventures Tom had next will be found in the next book of this
series, which will be entitled, "Tom Swift in Captivity; Or, a Daring
Escape by Airship."

Tom had several offers to give exhibitions in his air glider, from
aviation committees at various meets, but he declined.

"I haven't time," he declared. "I'm too busy."

"You ought to rest," his chum Ned advised him.

"'Bless my alarm clock!' as Mr. Damon would say," exclaimed Tom. "The
best rest is new work," and then he began sketching his ideas for a
silent motor craft, during which we will take leave of him for a while.

========================================
========================================

TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER

or

The Quickest Flight on Record


By

VICTOR APPLETON




CONTENTS

     I  The Prize Offer
    II  Mr. Swift Is Ill
   III  The Plans Disappear
    IV  Anxious Days
     V  Building the Sky Racer
    VI  Andy Foger Will Contest
   VII  Seeking a Clue
  VIII  The Empty Shed
    IX  A Trial Flight
     X  A Midnight Intruder
    XI  Tom Is Hurt
   XII  Miss Nestor Calls
  XIII  A Clash with Andy
   XIV  The Great Test
    XV  A Noise in the Night
   XVI  A Mysterious Fire
  XVII  Mr. Swift Is Worse
 XVIII  The Broken Bridge
   XIX  A Nervy Specialist
    XX  Just in Time
   XXI  "Will He Live?"
  XXII  Off to the Meet
 XXIII  The Great Race
  XXIV  Won by a Length
   XXV  Home Again--Conclusion




TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER



Chapter One

The Prize Offer


"Is this Tom Swift, the inventor of several airships?"

The man who had rung the bell glanced at the youth who answered his
summons.

"Yes, I'm Tom Swift," was the reply. "Did you wish to see me?"

"I do. I'm Mr. James Gunmore, secretary of the Eagle Park Aviation
Association. I had some correspondence with you about a prize contest
we are going to hold. I believe--"

"Oh, yes, I remember now," and the young inventor smiled pleasantly as
he opened wider the door of his home. "Won't you come in? My father
will be glad to see you. He is as much interested in airships as I am."
And Tom led the way to the library, where the secretary of the aviation
society was soon seated in a big, comfortable leather chair.

"I thought we could do better, and perhaps come to some decision more
quickly, if I came to see you, than if we corresponded," went on Mr.
Gunmore. "I hope I haven't disturbed you at any of your inventions,"
and the secretary smiled at the youth.

"No. I'm through for to-day," replied Tom. "I'm glad to see you. I
thought at first it was my chum, Ned Newton. He generally runs over in
the evening."

"Our society, as I wrote you, Mr. Swift, is planning to hold a very
large and important aviation meet at Eagle Park, which is a suburb of
Westville, New York State. We expect to have all the prominent
'bird-men' there, to compete for prizes, and your name was mentioned. I
wrote to you, as you doubtless recall, asking if you did not care to
enter."

"And I think I wrote you that my big aeroplane-dirigible, the Red
Cloud, was destroyed in Alaska, during a recent trip we made to the
caves of ice there, after gold," replied Tom.

"Yes, you did," admitted Mr. Gunmore, "and while our committee was very
sorry to hear that, we hoped you might have some other air craft that
you could enter at our meet. We want to make it as complete as
possible, and we all feel that it would not be so unless we had a Swift
aeroplane there."

"It's very kind of you to say so," remarked Tom, "but since my big
craft was destroyed I really have nothing I could enter."

"Haven't you an aeroplane of any kind? I made this trip especially to
get you to enter. Haven't you anything in which you could compete for
the prizes? There are several to be offered, some for distance flights,
some for altitude, and the largest, ten thousand dollars, for the
speediest craft. Ten thousand dollars is the grand prize, to be awarded
for the quickest flight on record."

"I surely would like to try for that," said Tom, "but the only craft I
have is a small monoplane, the Butterfly, I call it, and while it is
very speedy, there have been such advances made in aeroplane
construction since I made mine that I fear I would be distanced if I
raced in her. And I wouldn't like that."

"No," agreed Mr. Gunmore. "I suppose not. Still, I do wish we could
induce you to enter. I don't mind telling you that we consider you a
drawing-card. Can't we induce you, some way?"

"I'm afraid not. I haven't any machine which--"

"Look here!" exclaimed the secretary eagerly. "Why can't you build a
special aeroplane to enter in the next meet? You'll have plenty of
time, as it doesn't come off for three months yet. We are only making
the preliminary arrangements. It is now June, and the meet is scheduled
for early in September. Couldn't you build a new and speedy aeroplane
in that time?"

Eagerly Mr. Gunmore waited for the answer. Tom Swift seemed to be
considering it. There was an increased brightness to his eyes, and one
could tell that he was thinking deeply. The secretary sought to clinch
his argument.

"I believe, from what I have heard of your work in the past, that you
could build an aeroplane which would win the ten-thousand-dollar
prize," he went on. "I would be very glad if you did win it, and, so I
think, would be the gentlemen associated with me in this enterprise. It
would be fine to have a New York State youth win the grand prize. Come,
Tom Swift, build a special craft, and enter the contest!"

As he paused for an answer footsteps were heard coming along the hall,
and a moment later an aged gentleman opened the door of the library.

"Oh! Excuse me, Tom," he said, "I didn't know you had company." And he
was about to withdraw.

"Don't go, father," said Tom. "You will be as much interested in this
as I am. This is Mr. Gunmore, of the Eagle Park Aviation Association.
This is my father, Mr. Gunmore."

"I've heard of you," spoke the secretary as he shook hands with the
aged inventor. "You and your son have made, in aeronautics, a name to
be proud of."

"And he wants us to go still farther, dad," broke in the youth. "He
wants me to build a specially speedy aeroplane, and race for ten
thousand dollars."

"Hum!" mused Mr. Swift. "Well, are you going to do it, Tom? Seems to me
you ought to take a rest. You haven't been back from your gold-hunting
trip to Alaska long enough to more than catch your breath, and now--"

"Oh, he doesn't have to go in this right away," eagerly explained Mr.
Gunmore. "There is plenty of time to make a new craft."

"Well, Tom can do as he likes about it," said his father. "Do you think
you could build anything speedier than your Butterfly, son?"

"I think so, father. That is, if you'd help me. I have a plan partly
thought out, but it will take some time to finish it. Still, I might
get it done in time."

"I hope you'll try!" exclaimed the secretary. "May I ask whether it
would be a monoplane or a biplane?"

"A monoplane, I think," answered Tom. "They are much more speedy than
the double-deckers, and if I'm going to try for the ten thousand
dollars I need the fastest machine I can build."

"We have the promise of one or two very fast monoplanes for the meet,"
went on Mr. Gunmore. "Would yours be of a new type?"

"I think it would," was the reply of the young inventor. "In fact, I am
thinking of making a smaller monoplane than any that have yet been
constructed, and yet one that will carry two persons. The hardest work
will be to make the engine light enough and still have it sufficiently
powerful to make over a hundred miles an hour, if necessary.

"A hundred miles an hour in a small monoplane! It isn't possible!"
cried the secretary.

"I'll make better time than that," said Tom quietly, and with not a
trace of boasting in his tones.

"Then you'll enter the meet?" asked Mr. Gunmore eagerly.

"Well, I'll think about it," promised Tom. "I'll let you know in a few
days. Meanwhile, I'll be thinking out the details for my new craft. I
have been going to build one ever since I got back, after having seen
my Red Cloud crushed in the ice cave. Now I think I had better begin
active work."

"I hope you will soon let me know," resumed the secretary. "I'm going
to put you down as a possible contestant for the ten-thousand-dollar
prize.  That can do no harm, and I hope you win it. I trust--"

He paused suddenly, and listened. So did Tom Swift and his father, for
they all distinctly heard stealthy footsteps under the open windows of
the library.

"Some one is out there, listening," said Tom in low tones.

"Perhaps it's Eradicate Sampson," suggested Mr. Swift, referring to the
eccentric colored man who was employed by the inventor and his son to
help around the place. "Very likely it was Eradicate, Tom."

"I don't think so," was the lad's answer. "He went to the village a
while ago, and said he wouldn't be back until late to-night. He had to
get some medicine for his mule, Boomerang, who is sick. No, it wasn't
Eradicate; but some one was under that window, trying to hear what we
said."

As he spoke in guarded tones, Tom went softly to the casement and
looked out. He could observe nothing, as the night was dark, and the
new moon, which had been shining, was now dimmed by clouds.

"See anything?" asked Mr. Gunmore as he advanced to Tom's side.

"No," was the low answer. "I can't hear anything now, either."

"I'll go speak to Mrs. Baggert, the housekeeper," volunteered Mr.
Swift.  "Perhaps it was she, or she may know something about it."

He started from the room, and as he went Tom noticed, with something of
a start, that his father appeared older that night than he had ever
looked before. There was a trace of pain on the face of the aged
inventor, and his step was lagging.

"I guess dad needs a rest and doctoring up," thought the young inventor
as he turned the electric chandelier off by a button on the wall, in
order to darken the room, so that he might peer out to better
advantage.  "I think he's been working too hard on his wireless motor.
I must get Dr. Gladby to come over and see dad. But now I want to find
out who that was under this window."

Once more Tom looked out. The moon had emerged from behind a thin bank
of clouds, and gave a little light.

"See anything?" asked Mr. Gunmore cautiously.

"No," whispered the youth, for it being a warm might, the windows were
open top and bottom, a screen on the outside keeping out mosquitoes and
other insects. "I can't see a thing," went on Tom, "but I'm sure--"

He paused suddenly. As he spoke there sounded a rustling in the
shrubbery a little distance from the window.

"There's something!" exclaimed Mr. Gunmore.

"I see!" answered the young inventor.

Without another word he softly opened the screen, and then, stooping
down to get under the lower sash (for the windows in the library ran
all the way to the floor), Tom dropped out of the casement upon the
thick grass.

As he did so he was aware of a further movement in the bushes. They
were violently agitated, and a second later a dark object sprang from
them and sprinted along the path.

"Here! Who are you? Hold on!" cried the young inventor.

But the figure never halted. Tom sprang forward, determined to see who
it was, and, if possible, capture him.

"Hold on!" he cried again. There was no answer.

Tom was a good runner, and in a few seconds he had gained on the
fugitive, who could just be seen in the dim light from the crescent
moon.

"I've got you!" cried Tom.

But he was mistaken, for at that instant his foot caught on the
outcropping root of a tree, and the young inventor went flat on his
face.

"Just my luck!" he cried.

He was quickly on his feet again, and took after the fugitive. The
latter glanced back, and, as it happened, Tom had a good look at his
face. He almost came to a stop, so startled was he.

"Andy Foger!" he exclaimed as he recognized the bully who had always
proved himself such an enemy of our hero. "Andy Foger sneaking under my
windows to hear what I had to say about my new aeroplane! I wonder what
his game can be? I'll soon find out!"

Tom was about to resume the chase, when he lost sight of the figure. A
moment later he heard the puffing of an automobile, as some one cranked
it up.

"It's too late!" exclaimed Tom. "There he goes in his car!" And knowing
it would be useless to keep up the chase, the youth turned back toward
his house.




Chapter Two

Mr. Swift is Ill


"Who was it?" asked Mr. Gunmore as Tom again entered the library. "A
friend of yours?"

"Hardly a friend," replied Tom grimly. "It was a young fellow who has
made lots of trouble for me in the past, and who, lately, with his
father, tried to get ahead of me and some friends of mine in locating a
gold claim in Alaska. I don't know what he's up to now, but certainly
it wasn't any good. He's got nerve, sneaking up under our windows!"

"What do you think was his object?"

"It would be hard to say."

"Can't you find him to-morrow, and ask him?"

"There's not much satisfaction in that. The less I have to do with Andy
Foger the better I'm satisfied. Well, perhaps it's just as well I fell,
and couldn't catch him. There would have been a fight, and I don't want
to worry dad any more than I can help. He hasn't been very well of
late."

"No, he doesn't look very strong," agreed the secretary. "But I hope he
doesn't get sick, and I hope no bad consequences result from the
eavesdropping of this Foger fellow."

Tom started for the hall, to get a brush with which to remove some of
the dust gathered in his chase after Andy. As he opened the library
door to go out Mr. Swift came in again.

"I saw Mrs. Baggert, Tom," he said. "She wasn't out under the window,
and, as you said, Eradicate isn't about. His mule is in the barn, so it
couldn't have been the animal straying around."

"No, dad. It was Andy Foger."

"Andy Foger!"

"Yes. I couldn't catch him. But you'd better go lie down, father. It's
getting late, and you look tired."

"I am tired, Tom, and I think I'll go to bed. Have you finished your
arrangements with Mr. Gunmore?"

"Well, I guess we've gone as far as we can until I invent the new
aeroplane," replied Tom, with a smile.

"Then you'll really enter the meet?" asked the secretary eagerly.

"I think I will," decided Tom. "The prize of ten thousand dollars is
worth trying for, and besides that, I'll be glad to get to work again
on a speedy craft. Yes, I'll enter the meet."

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Gunmore, shaking hands with the young inventor.
"I didn't have my trip for nothing, then. I'll go back in the morning
and report to the committee that I've been successful. I am greatly
obliged to you."

He left the Swift home, after refusing Tom's invitation to remain all
night, and went to his hotel. Tom then insisted that his father retire.

As for the young inventor, he was not satisfied with the result of his
attempt to catch Andy Foger. He had no idea why the bully was hiding
under the library window, but Tom surmised that some mischief might be
afoot.

"Sam Snedecker or Pete Bailey, the two cronies of Andy, may still be
around here, trying to play some trick on me," mused Tom. "I think I'll
take a look outside." And taking a stout cane from the umbrella rack,
the youth sallied forth into the yard and extensive grounds surrounding
his house.

While he is thus looking for possible intruders we will tell you a
little more about him than has been possible since the call of the
aviation secretary.

Tom Swift lived with his father, Barton Swift, in the town of Shopton,
New York State. The young man had followed in the footsteps of his
parent, and was already an inventor of note.

Their home was presided over by Mrs. Baggert, as housekeeper, since
Mrs. Swift had been dead several years. In addition, there was Garret
Jackson, an engineer, who aided Tom and his father, and Eradicate
Sampson, an odd colored man, who, with his mule, Boomerang, worked
about the place.

In the first volume of this series, entitled "Tom Swift and his
Motor-Cycle," here was related how he came to possess that machine. A
certain Mr. Wakefield Damon, an eccentric gentleman, who was always
blessing himself, or something about him, owned the cycle, but he came
to grief on it, and sold it to Tom very cheaply.

Tom had a number of adventures on the wheel, and, after having used the
motor to save a valuable patent model from a gang of unscrupulous men,
the lad acquired possession of a power boat, in which he made several
trips, and took part in many exciting happenings.

Some time later, in company with John Sharp, an aeronaut, whom Tom had
rescued from Lake Carlopa, after the airman had nearly lost his life in
a burning balloon, the young inventor made a big airship, called the
Red Cloud. With Mr. Damon, Tom made several trips in this craft, as set
forth in the book, "Tom Swift and His Airship."

It was after this that Tom and his father built a submarine boat, and
went under the ocean for sunken treasure, and, following that trip Tom
built a speedy electric runabout, and by a remarkable run in that, with
Mr. Damon, saved a bank from ruin, bringing gold in time to stave off a
panic.

"Tom Swift and His Wireless Message" told of the young inventor's plan
to save the castaways of Earthquake Island, and how he accomplished it
by constructing a wireless plant from the remains of the wrecked
airship Whizzer. After Tom got back from Earthquake Island he went with
Mr. Barcoe Jenks, whom he met on the ill-fated bit of land, to discover
the secret of the diamond makers. They found the mysterious men, but
the trip was not entirely successful, for the mountain containing the
cave where the diamonds were made was destroyed by a lightning shock,
just as Mr. Parker, a celebrated scientist, who accompanied the party,
said it would be.

But his adventure in seeking to discover the secret of making precious
stones did not satisfy Tom Swift, and when he and his friends got back
from the mountains they prepared to go to Alaska to search for gold in
the caves of ice. They were almost defeated in their purpose by the
actions of Andy Foger and his father, who in an under-hand manner, got
possession of a valuable map, showing the location of the gold, and
made a copy of the drawing.

Then, when Tom and his friends set off in the Red Cloud, as related in
"Tom Swift in the Caves of Ice," the Fogers, in another airship, did
likewise. But Tom and his party were first on the scene, and
accomplished their purpose, though they had to fight the savage
Indians.  The airship was wrecked in a cave of ice, that collapsed on
it, and the survivors had desperate work getting away from the frozen
North.

Tom had been home all the following winter and spring, and he had done
little more than work on some small inventions, when a new turn was
given his thoughts and energies by a visit from Mr. Gunmore, as
narrated in the first chapter of the present volume.

"Well, I guess no one is here," remarked the young inventor as he
completed the circuit of the grounds and walked slowly back toward the
house. "I think I scared Andy so that he won't come back right away. He
had the laugh on me, though, when I stumbled and fell."

As Tom proceeded he heard some one approaching, around the path at the
side of the house.

"Who's there?" he called quickly, taking a firmer grasp of his stick.

"It's me, Massa Swift," was the response. "I jest come back from town.
I got some peppermint fo' mah mule, Boomerang, dat's what I got."

"Oh! It's you, is it, Rad?" asked the youth in easier tones.

"Dat's who it am. Did yo' t'ink it were some un else?"

"I did," replied Tom. "Andy Foger has been sneaking around. Keep your
eyes open the rest of the night, Rad."

"I will, Massa Tom."

The youth went into the house, having left word with the engineer, Mr.
Jackson, to be on the alert for anything suspicious.

"And now I guess I'll go to bed, and make an early start to-morrow
morning, planning my new aeroplane," mused Tom. "I'm going to make the
speediest craft of the air ever seen!"

As he started toward his room Tom Swift heard the voice of the
housekeeper calling to him:

"Tom! Oh, Tom! Come here, quickly!"

"What's the matter?" he asked, in vague alarm.

"Something has happened to your father!" was the startling reply. "He's
fallen down, and is unconscious! Come quickly! Send for the doctor!"

Tom fairly ran toward his father's room.




Chapter Three

The Plans Disappear


Mr. Swift was lying on the floor, where he had fallen, in front of his
bed, as he was preparing to retire. There was no mark of injury upon
him, and at first, as he knelt down at his father's side, Tom was at a
loss to account for what had taken place.

"How did it happen? When was it?" he asked of Mrs. Baggert, as he held
up his father's head, and noted that the aged man was breathing
slightly.

"I don't know what happened, Tom," answered the housekeeper, "but I
heard him fall, and ran upstairs, only to find him lying there, just
like that. Then I called you. Hadn't you better have a doctor?"

"Yes; we'll need one at once. Send Eradicate. Tell him to run--not to
wait for his mule--Boomerang is too slow. Oh, no! The telephone, of
course! Why didn't I think of that at first? Please telephone for Dr.
Gladby, Mrs. Baggert. Ask him to come as soon as possible, and then
tell Garret Jackson to step here. I'll have him help me get father into
bed."

The housekeeper hastened to the instrument, and was soon in
communication with the physician, who promised to call at once. The
engineer was summoned from another part of the house, and then
Eradicate was aroused.

Mrs. Baggert had the colored man help her get some kettles of hot water
in readiness for possible use by the doctor. Mr. Jackson aided Tom to
lift Mr. Swift up on the bed, and they got off some of his clothes.

"I'll try to see if I can revive him with a little aromatic spirits of
ammonia," decided Tom, as he noticed that his father was still
unconscious. He hastened to prepare the strong spirits, while he was
conscious of a feeling of fear and alarm, mingled with sadness.

Suppose his father should die? Tom could not bear to think of that. He
would be left all alone, and how much he would miss the companionship
and comradeship of his father none but himself knew.

"Oh! but I mustn't think he's going to die!" exclaimed the youth, as he
mixed the medicine.

Mr. Swift feebly opened his eyes after Tom and Mr. Jackson had
succeeded in forcing some of the ammonia between his lips.

"Where am I? What happened?" asked the aged inventor faintly.

"We don't know, exactly," spoke Tom softly. "You are ill, father. I've
sent for the doctor. He'll fix you up. He'll be here soon."

"Yes, I'm--I'm ill," murmured the aged man. "Something hurts me--here,"
and he put his hand over his heart.

Tom felt a nameless sense of fear. He wished now that he had insisted
on his parent consulting a physician some time before, when Mr. Swift
first complained of a minor ailment. Perhaps now it was too late.

"Oh! when will that doctor come?" murmured Tom impatiently.

Mrs. Baggert, who was nervously going in and out of the room, again
went to the telephone.

"He's on his way," the housekeeper reported. "His wife said he just
started out in his auto."

Dr. Gladby hurried into the room a little later, and cast a quick look
at Mr. Swift, who had again lapsed into unconsciousness.

"Do you think he--think he's going to die?" faltered Tom. He was no
longer the self-reliant young inventor. He could meet danger bravely
when it threatened himself alone, but when his father was stricken he
seemed to lose all courage.

"Die? Nonsense!" exclaimed the doctor heartily. "He's not dead yet, at
all events, and while there's life there's hope. I'll soon have him out
of this spell."

It was some little time, however, before Mr. Swift again opened his
eyes, but he seemed to gain strength from the remedies which Dr. Gladby
administered, and in about an hour the inventor could sit up.

"But you must be careful," cautioned the physician. "Don't overdo
yourself. I'll be in again in the morning, and now I'll leave you some
medicine, to be taken every two hours."

"Oh, I feel much better," said Mr. Swift, and his voice certainly
seemed stronger. "I can't imagine what happened. I came upstairs, after
Tom had received a visit from the minister, and that's all I remember."

"The minister, father!" exclaimed Tom, in great amazement. "The
minister wasn't here this evening! That was Mr. Gunmore, the aviation
secretary.  Don't you remember?"

"I don't remember any gentleman like that calling here to-night," Mr.
Swift said blankly. "It was the minister, I'm sure, Tom."

"The minister was here last night, Mr. Swift," said the housekeeper.

"Was he? Why, it seems like to-night. And I came upstairs after talking
to him, and then it all got black, and--and--"

"There, now; don't try to think," advised the doctor. "You'll be all
right in the morning."

"But I can't remember anything about that aviation man," protested Mr.
Swift. "I never used to be that way--forgetting things. I don't like
it!"

"Oh, it's just because you're tired," declared the physician. "It will
all come back to you in the morning. I'll stop in and see you then. Now
try to go to sleep." And he left the room.

Tom followed him, Mrs. Baggert and Mr. Jackson remaining with the sick
man.

"What is the matter with my father, Dr. Gladby?" asked Tom earnestly,
as the doctor prepared to take his departure. "Is it anything serious?"

"Well," began the medical man, "I would not be doing my duty, Tom, if I
did not tell you what it is. That is, it is comparatively serious, but
it is curable, and I think we can bring him around. He has an affection
of the heart, that, while it is common enough, is sometimes fatal.

"But I do not think it will be so in your father's case. He has a fine
constitution, and this would never have happened had he not been run
down from overwork. That is the principal trouble. What he needs is
rest; and then, with the proper remedies, he will be as well as before."

"But that strange lapse of memory, doctor?"

"Oh, that is nothing. It is due to the fact that he has been using his
brain too much. The brain protests, and refuses to work until rested.
Your father has been working rather hard of late hasn't he?"

"Yes; on a new wireless motor."

"I thought so. Well, a good rest is what he needs, and then his mind
and body will be in tune again. I'll be around in the morning."

Tom was somewhat relieved by the doctor's words, but not very much so,
and he spent an anxious night, getting up every two hours to administer
the medicine. Toward morning Mr. Swift fell into a heavy sleep, and did
not awaken for some time.

"Oh, you're much better!" declared Dr. Gladby when he saw his patient
that day.

"Yes, I feel better," admitted Mr. Swift.

"And can't you remember about Mr. Gunmore calling?" asked Tom.

The aged inventor shook his head, with a puzzled air.

"I can't remember it at all," he said. "The minister is the last person
I remember calling here."

Tom looked worried, but the physician said it was a common feature of
the disease from which Mr. Swift suffered, and would doubtless pass
away.

"And you don't remember how we talked about me building a speedy
aeroplane and trying for the ten-thousand-dollar prize?" asked Tom.

"I can't remember a thing about it," said the inventor, with a puzzled
shake of his head, "and I'm not going to try, at least not right away.
But, Tom, if you're going to build a new aeroplane, I want to help you.
I'll give you the benefit of my advice. I think my new form of motor
can be used in it."

"Now! now! No inventions--at least not just yet!" objected the
physician. "You must have a good rest first, Mr. Swift, and get strong.
Then you and Tom can build as many airships as you like."

Mr. Swift felt so much better about three days later that he wanted to
get right to work planning the airship that was to win the big prize,
but the doctor would not hear of it. Tom, however, began to make rough
sketches of what he had in mind changing them from time to time. He
also worked on a type of motor, very light, and modeled after one his
father had recently patented.

Then a new idea came to Tom in regard to the shape of his aeroplane,
and he worked several days drawing the plans for it. It was a new idea
in construction, and he believed it would give him the great speed he
desired.

"But I'd like dad to see it," he said. "As soon as he's well enough
I'll go over it with him."

That time came a week later, and with a complete set of the plans,
embodying his latest ideas, Tom went into the library where his father
was seated in an easy-chair. Dr. Gladby had said it would not now harm
the aged inventor to do a little work. Tom spread the drawings out in
front of his father, and began to explain them in detail.

"I really think you have something great there, Tom!" exclaimed Mr.
Swift, at length. "It is a very small monoplane, to be sure, but I
think with the new principle you have introduced it will work; but, if
I were you, I'd shape those wing tips a little differently."

"No, they're better that way," said Tom pleasantly, for he did not
often disagree with his father. "I'll show you from a little model I
have made. I'll get it right away."

Anxious to demonstrate that he was right in his theory, Tom hurried
from the library to get the model of which he had spoken. He left the
roll of plans lying on a small table near where his father was seated.

"There, you see, dad," said the young inventor as he re-entered the
library a few minutes later, "when you warp the wing tips in making a
spiral ascent it throws your tail wings out of plumb, and so--"

Tom paused in some amazement, for Mr. Swift was lying back in his
chair, with his eyes closed. The lad started in alarm, laid aside his
model, and sprang to his father's side.

"He's had another of those heart attacks!" gasped Tom. He was just
going to call Mrs. Baggert, when Mr. Swift opened his eyes. He looked
at Tom, and the lad could see that they were bright, and did not show
any signs of illness.

"Well, I declare!" exclaimed the inventor. "I must have dozed off, Tom,
while you were gone. That's what I did. I fell asleep!"

"Oh!" said Tom, much relieved. "I was afraid you were ill again. Now,
in this model, as you will see by the plans, it is necessary--"

He paused, and looked over at the table where he had left the drawings.
They were not there!

"The plans, father!" Tom exclaimed. "The plans I left on the table!
Where are they?"

"I haven't touched them," was the answer. "They were on that table,
where you put them, when I closed my eyes for a little nap. I forgot
all about them. Are you sure they're missing?"

"They're not here!" And Tom gazed wildly about the room. "Where can
they have gone?"

"I wasn't out of my chair," said Mr. Swift, "I ought not to have gone
to sleep, but--"

Tom fairly jumped toward the long library window, the same one from
which he had leaped to pursue Andy Foger. The casement was open, and
Tom noted that the screen was also unhooked. It had been closed when he
went to get the model, he was sure of that.

"Look, dad! See!" he exclaimed, as he picked up from the floor a small
piece of paper.

"What is it, Tom?"

"A sheet on which I did some figuring. It is no good, but it was in
with the plans. It must have dropped out."

"Do you mean that some one has been in here and taken the plans of your
new aeroplane, Tom?" gasped his father.

"That's just what I mean! They sneaked in here while you were dozing,
took the plans, and jumped out of the window with them. On the way this
paper fell out. It's the only clue we have. Stay here, dad. I'm going
to have a look." And Tom jumped from the library window and ran down
the path after the unknown thief.




Chapter Four

Anxious Days


Peering on all sides as he dashed along the gravel walk, hoping to
catch a glimpse of the unknown intruder in the garden or shrubbery, Tom
sprinted on at top speed. Now and then he paused to listen, but no
sound came to him to tell of some one in retreat before him. There was
only Silence.

"Mighty queer," mused the youth. "Whoever it was, he couldn't have had
more than a minute start of me--no, not even half a minute--and yet
they've disappeared as completely as though the ground had opened and
let them down; and the worst of it is, that they've taken my plans with
them!"

He turned about and retraced his steps, making a careful search. He saw
no one, until, turning a corner, a little later, he met Eradicate
Sampson.

"You haven't seen any strangers around here just now, have you, Rad?"
asked Tom anxiously.

"No, indeedy, I hasn't, Massa Tom. What fo' kind ob a stranger was him?"

"That's just what I don't know. Rad. But some one sneaked into the
library just now and took some of my plans while my father dozed off. I
jumped out after him as soon as I could, but he has disappeared."

"Maybe it were th' man who done stowed hisself away on yo' airship, de
time yo' all went after de diamonds," suggested the colored man.

"No, it couldn't have been him. If it was anybody, it was Andy Foger,
or some of his crowd. You didn't see Andy, did you, Rad?"

"No, indeedy; but if I do, I suah will turn mah mule, Boomerang, loose
on him, an' he won't take any mo' plans--not right off, Massa Tom."

"No, I guess not. Well, I must get back to dad, or he'll worry. Keep
your eyes open, Rad, and if you see Andy Foger, or any one else, around
here, let me know. Just sing out for all you're worth."

"Shall I call out, Massa Tom, ef I sees dat blessin' man?"

"You mean Mr. Damon?"

"Dat's de one. De gen'man what's allers a-blessin' ob hisself or his
shoelaces, or suffin laik dat. Shall I sing out ef I sees him?"

"Well, no; not exactly, Rad. Just show Mr. Damon up to the house. I'd
be glad to see him again, though I don't fancy he'll call. He's off on
a little trip, and won't be back for a week. But watch out, Rad." And
with that Tom turned toward the house, shaking his head over the puzzle
of the missing plans.

"Did you find any one?" asked his father eagerly as the young inventor
entered the library.

"No," was the gloomy answer. "There wasn't a sign of any one."

Tom went over to the window and looked about for clues. There was none
that he could see, and a further examination of the ground under the
window disclosed nothing. There was gravel beneath the casement, and
this was not the best medium for retaining footprints. Nor were the
gravel walks any better.

"Not a sign of any one," murmured Tom. "Are you sure you didn't hear
any noise, dad, when you dozed off?"

"Not a sound, Tom. In fact, it's rather unusual for me to go to sleep
like that, but I suppose it's because of my illness. But I couldn't
have been asleep long--not more than two minutes."

"That's what I think. Yet in that time someone, who must have been on
the watch, managed to get in here and take my plans for the new sky
racer. I don't see how they got the wire screen open from the outside,
though. It fastens with a strong hook."

"And was the screen open?" asked Mr. Swift

"Yes, it was unhooked. Either they pushed a wire in through the mesh,
caught it under the hook, and pulled it up from the outside, or else
the screen was opened from the inside."

"I don't believe they could get inside to open the screen without some
of us seeing them," spoke the older inventor. "More likely, Tom, it
wasn't hooked, and they found it an easy matter to simply pull it open."

"That's possible. I'll ask Mrs. Baggert if the screen was unhooked."

But the housekeeper could not be certain on that point, and so that
part of the investigation amounted to nothing.

"It's too bad!" exclaimed Mr. Swift. "It's my fault, for dozing off
that way."

"No, indeed, it isn't!" declared Tom stoutly.

"Is the loss a serious one?" asked his father. "Have you no copy of the
plans?"

"Yes, I have a rough draft from which I made the completed drawings,
and I can easily make another set. But that isn't what worries me--the
mere loss of the plans."

"What is it, then, Tom?"

"The fact that whoever took them must know that they are the plans for
a sky racer that is to take part in the big meet. I have worked it out
on a new principle, and it is not yet patented. Whoever stole my plans
can make the same kind of a sky racer that I intended to construct, and
so stand as good a chance to win the prize of ten thousand dollars as I
will."

"That certainly is too bad, Tom. I never thought of that. Do you
suspect any one?"

"No one, unless it's Andy Foger. He's mean enough to do a thing like
that, but I didn't think he'd have the nerve. However, I'll see if I
can learn anything about him. He may have been sneaking around, and if
he has my plans he'd ask nothing better than to make a sky racer and
beat me."

"Oh, Tom, I'm so sorry!" exclaimed Mr. Swift "I--I feel very bad about
it!"

"There, never mind!" spoke the lad, seeing that his father was looking
ill again. "Don't think any more about it, dad. I'll get back those
plans. Come, now. It's time for your medicine, and then you must lie
down." For the aged inventor was looking tired and weak.

Wearily he let Tom lead him to his room, and after seeing that the
invalid was comfortable Tom called up Dr. Gladby, to have him come and
see Mr. Swift. The doctor said his patient had been overdoing himself a
little, and must rest more if he was to completely recover.

Learning that his father was no worse, Tom set off to find Andy Foger.

"I can't rest until I know whether or not he has my plans," he said to
himself. "I don't want to make a speedy aeroplane, and find out at the
last minute that Andy, or some of his cronies, have duplicated it."

But Tom got little satisfaction from Andy Foger. When that bully was
accused of having been around Tom's house he denied it, and though the
young inventor did not actually accuse him of taking the plans, he
hinted at it. Andy muttered many indignant negatives, and called on
some of his cronies to witness that at the time the plans were taken he
and they were some distance from the Swift home.

So Tom was baffled; and though he did not believe the red-haired lad's
denial, there was no way in which he could prove to the contrary.

"If he didn't take the plans, who did?" mused Tom.

As the young inventor turned away after cross-questioning Andy, the
bully called out:

"You'll never win that ten thousand dollars!"

"What do you know about that?" demanded Tom quickly.

"Oh, I know," sneered Andy. "There'll be bigger and better aeroplanes
in that meet than you can make, and you'll never win the prize."

"I suppose you heard about the affair by sneaking around under our
windows, and listening," said Tom.

"Never mind how I know it, but I do," retorted the bully.

"Well, I'll tell you one thing," said Tom calmly. "If you come around
again it won't be healthy for you. Look out for live wires, if you try
to do the listening act any more, Andy!" And with that ominous warning
Tom turned away.

"What do you suppose he means, Andy?" asked Pete Bailey, one of Andy's
cronies.

"It means he's got electrical wires strung around his place," declared
Sam Snedecker, "and that we'll be shocked if we go up there. I'm not
going!"

"Me, either," added Pete, and Andy laughed uneasily.

Tom heard what they said, and in the next few days he made himself busy
by putting some heavy wires in and about the grounds where they would
show best. But the wires carried no current, and were only displayed to
impress a sense of fear on Andy and his cronies, which purpose they
served well.

But it was like locking the stable door after the horse had been
stolen, for with all the precautions he could take Tom could not get
back his plans, and he spent many anxious days seeking them. They
seemed to have completely disappeared, however, and the young inventor
decided there was nothing else to do but to draw new ones.

He set to work on them, and in the meanwhile tried to learn whether or
not Andy had the missing plans. He sought this information by stealth,
and was aided by his chum, Ned Newton. But all to no purpose. Not the
slightest trace or clue was discovered.




Chapter Five

Building the Sky Racer


"What will you do, if, after you have your little monoplane all
constructed, and get ready to race, you find that some one else has one
exactly like it at the meet?" asked Ned Newton one day, when he and Tom
were out in the big workshop, talking things over. "What will you do,
Tom?"

"I don't see that there is anything I can do. I'll go on to the meet,
of course, and trust to some improvements I have since brought out, and
to what I know about aeroplanes, to help me win the race. I'll know,
too, who stole my plans."

"But it will be too late, then."

"Yes, too late, perhaps, to stop them from using the drawings, but not
too late to punish them for the theft. It's a great mystery, and I'll
be on the anxious seat all the while. But it can't be helped."

"When are you going to start work on the sky racer?"

"Pretty soon, now. I've got another set of plans made, and I've fixed
them so that if they are stolen it won't do any one any good."

"How's that?"

"I've put in a whole lot of wrong figures and measurements, and scores
of lines and curves that mean nothing. I have marked the right figures
and lines by a secret mark, and when I work on them I'll use only the
proper ones. But any one else wouldn't know this. Oh, I'll fool 'em
this time!"

"I hope you do. Well, when you get the machine done I'd like to ride in
it. Will it carry two, as your Butterfly does?"

"Yes, only it will be much different; and, of course, it will go much
faster. I'll give you a ride, all right, Ned. Well, now I must get busy
and see what material I need for what I hope will prove to be the
speediest aeroplane in the world."

"That's going some! I must be leaving now. Don't forget your promise. I
saw Mary Nestor on my way over here. She was asking for you. She said
you must be very busy, for she hadn't seen you in some time."

"Um!" was all Tom answered, but by the blush that mounted to his face
it was evident that he was more interested in Mary Nestor than his mere
exclamation indicated.

When Ned had gone Tom got out pencil and paper, and was busily engaged
in making some intricate calculations. He drew odd little sketches on
the margin of the sheet, and then wrote out a list of the things he
would need to construct the new aeroplane.

This finished, he went to Mr. Jackson, the engineer, and asked him to
get the various things together, and to have them put in the special
shop where Tom did most of his work.

"I want to get the machine together as soon as I can," he remarked to
the engineer, "for it will need to be given a good tryout before I
enter in the race, and I may find that I'll have to make several
changes in it."

Mr. Jackson promised to attend to the matter right away, and then Tom
went in to talk to his father about the motor that was to whirl the
propeller of the new air craft.

Mr. Swift had improved very much in the past few days, and though Dr.
Gladby said he was far from being well, the physician declared there
was no reason why he should not do some inventive work.

He and Tom were deep in an argument of gasoline motors, discussing the
best manner of attaching the fins to the cylinders to make them
air-cooled, when a voice sounded outside, the voice of Eradicate:

"Heah! Whar yo' goin'?" demanded the colored man. "Whar yo' goin'?"

"Somebody's out in the garden!" exclaimed Tom, jumping up suddenly.

"Perhaps it's the same person who took the plans!" suggested Mr. Swift.

"Hold on, dere!" yelled Eradicate again.

Then a voice replied:

"Bless my insurance policy! What's the matter? Have there been burglars
around? Why all these precautions? Bless my steam heater! Don't you
know me?"

"Mr. Damon!" cried Tom, a look of pleasure coming over his face. "Mr.
Damon is coming!"

"So I should judge," responded Mr. Swift, with a smile. "I wonder why
Eradicate didn't recognize him?"

They learned why a moment later, for on looking from the library
window, Tom saw the colored man coming up the walk behind a
well-dressed gentleman.

"Why, mah goodness! It's Mr. Damon!" exclaimed Eradicate. "I didn't
know yo', sah, wif dem whiskers on! I didn't, fo' a fac'!"

"Bless my razor! I suppose it does make a difference," said the
eccentric man. "Yes, my wife thought I'd look better, and more sedate,
with a beard, so I grew one to please her. But I don't like it. A beard
is too warm this kind of weather; eh, Tom?" And Mr. Damon waved his
hand to the young inventor and his father, who stood in the low windows
of the library. "Entirely too warm, bless my finger-nails, yes!"

"I agree with you!" exclaimed Tom. "Come in! We're glad to see you!"

"I called to see if you aren't going on another trip to the North Pole,
or somewhere in the Arctic regions," went on Mr. Damon.

"Why?" inquired Tom.

"Why, then this heavy beard of mine would come in handy. It would keep
my throat and chin warm." And Mr. Damon ran his hands through his
luxuriant whiskers.

"No more northern trips right away," said Tom. "I'm about to build a
speedy monoplane, to take part in the big meet at Eagle Park."

"Oh, yes, I heard about the meet," said Mr. Damon. "I'd like to be in
that."

"Well, I'm building a machine that will carry two," went on Tom, "and
if you think you can stand a speed of a hundred miles an hour, or
better, I'll let you come with me. There are some races where a
passenger is allowed."

"Have you got a razor?" asked Mr. Damon suddenly.

"What for?" inquired Mr. Swift, wondering what the eccentric man was
going to do.

"Why, bless my shaving soap! I'm going to cut off my beard. If I go in
a monoplane at a hundred miles an hour I don't want to make any more
resistance to the wind than possible, and my whiskers would certainly
hold back Tom's machine. Where's a razor? I'm going to shave at once.
My wife won't mind when I tell her what it's for. Lend me a razor,
please, Tom."

"Oh, there's plenty of time," explained the lad, with a laugh. "The
race doesn't take place for over two months. But when it does, I think
you would be better off without a beard."

"I know it," said Mr. Damon simply. "I'll shave before we enter the
contest, Tom. But now tell me all about it."

Tom did so, relating the story of the theft of the plans. Mr. Damon was
for having Andy arrested at once, but Mr. Swift and his son pointed out
that they had no evidence against him.

"All we can do," said the young inventor, "is to keep watch on him, and
see if he is building another aeroplane. He has all the facilities, and
he may attempt to get ahead of me. If he enters a sky craft at the meet
I'll be pretty sure that he has made it from my stolen plans."

"Bless my wing tips!" cried Mr. Damon. "But can't we do anything to
stop him?"

"I'm afraid not," answered Tom; and then he showed Mr. Damon his
re-drawn plans, and told in detail of how he intended to construct the
new aeroplane.

The eccentric man remained as the guest of the Swift family that night,
departing for his home the next day, and promising to be on hand as
soon as Tom was ready to test his new craft, which would be in about a
month.

As the days passed, Tom, with the help of his father, whose health was
slightly better, and with the aid of Mr. Jackson, began work on the
speedy little sky racer.

As you boys are all more or less familiar with aeroplanes, we will not
devote much space to the description of the new one Tom Swift made. We
can describe it in general terms, but there were some features of it
which Tom kept a secret from all save his father.

Suffice it to say that Tom had decided to build a small air craft of
the single-wing type, known as the monoplane. It was to be a cross
between the Bleriot and the Antoinette, with the general features of
both, but with many changes or improvements.

The wings were shaped somewhat like those of a humming-bird, which, as
is well known, can, at times, vibrate its wings with such velocity that
the most rapid camera lens cannot quite catch.

And when it is known that a bullet in flight has been successfully
photographed, the speed of the wings of the humming-bird can be better
appreciated.

The writer has seen a friend, with a very rapid camera, which was used
to snap automobiles in flight, attempt to take a picture of a
humming-bird. He got the picture, all right, but the plate was blurred,
showing that the wings had moved faster than the lens could throw them
on the sensitive plate.

Not that Tom intended the wings of his monoplane to vibrate, but he
adopted that style as being the best adapted to allow of rapid flight
through the air; and the young inventor had determined that he would
clip many minutes from the best record yet made.

The body of his craft, between the forward wings and the rear ones,
where the rudders were located, was shaped like a cigar, with side
wings somewhat like the fin keels of the ocean liner to prevent a
rolling motion. In addition, Tom had an ingenious device to
automatically adapt his monoplane to sudden currents of air that might
overturn it, and this device was one of the points which he kept secret.

The motor, which was air-cooled, was located forward, and was just
above the heads of the operator and the passenger who sat beside him.
The single propeller, which was ten feet in diameter, gave a minimum
thrust of one thousand pounds at two thousand revolutions per minute.

This was one feature wherein Tom's craft differed from others. The
usual aeroplane propeller is eight feet in diameter, and gives from
four to five hundred pounds thrust at about one thousand revolutions
per minute, so it can be readily seen wherein Tom had an advantage.

"But I'm building this for speed," he said to Mr. Jackson, "and I'm
going to get it! We'll make a hundred miles an hour without trouble."

"I believe you," replied the engineer. "The motor you and your father
have made is a wonder for lightness and power."

In fact, the whole monoplane was so light and frail as to give one the
idea of a rather large model, instead of a real craft, intended for
service. But a careful inspection showed the great strength it had, for
it was braced and guyed in a new way, and was as rigid as a
steel-trussed bridge.

"What are you going to call her?" asked Mr. Jackson, about two weeks
after they had started work on the craft, and when it had begun to
assume shape and form.

"I'm going to name her the Humming-Bird," replied Tom. "She's little,
but oh, my!"

"And I guess she'll bring home the prize," added the engineer.

And as the days went by, and Tom, his father and Mr. Jackson continued
to work on the speedy craft, this hope grew in the heart of the young
inventor. But he could not rid himself of worry as to the fate of the
plans that had disappeared. Who had them? Was some one making a machine
like his own from them? Tom wished he knew.




Chapter Six

Andy Foger Will Contest


One afternoon, as Tom was working away in the shop on his sky racer,
adjusting one of the rear rudders, and pausing now and then to admire
the trim little craft, he heard some one approaching. Looking out
through a small observation peephole made for this purpose, he saw Mrs.
Baggert hurrying toward the building.

"I wonder what's the matter?" he said aloud, for there was a look of
worriment on the lady's face. Tom threw open the door. "What is it,
Mrs. Baggert?" he called. "Some one up at the house who wants to see
me?"

"No, it's your father!" panted the housekeeper, for she was quite
stout.  "He is very ill again, and I can't seem to get Dr. Gladby on
the telephone. Central says he doesn't answer."

"My father worse!" cried Tom in alarm, dropping his tools and hurrying
from the shop. "Where's Eradicate? Send him for the doctor. Perhaps the
wires are broken. If he can't locate Dr. Gladby, get Dr. Kurtz. We must
have some one. Here, Rad! Where are you?" he called, raising his voice.

"Heah I be!" answered the colored man, coming from the direction of the
garden, which he had been weeding.

"Get out your mule, and go for Dr. Gladby. If he isn't home, get Dr.
Kurtz. Hurry, Rad!"

"I's mighty sorry, Massa Tom," answered the colored man, "but I cain't
hurry, nohow."

"Why not?"

"Because Boomerang done gone lame, an' he won't run. I'll go mahse'f,
but I cain't take dat air mule."

"Never mind. I'll go in the Butterfly," decided Tom quickly. "I'll run
up to the house and see how dad is, and while I'm gone, Rad, you get
out the Butterfly. I can make the trip in that. If Dr. Kurtz had a
'phone I could get him, but he lives over on the back road, where there
isn't a line. Hurry, Rad!"

"Yes, sah, Massa Tom, I'll hurry!"

The colored man knew how to get the monoplane in shape for a flight, as
he had often done it.

Tom found his father in no immediate danger, but Mr. Swift had had a
slight recurrence of his heart trouble, and it was thought best to have
a doctor. So Tom started off in his air craft, rising swiftly above the
housetop, and sailed off toward the old-fashioned residence of Dr.
Kurtz, a sturdy, elderly German physician, who sometimes attended Mr.
Swift. Tom decided that as long as Dr. Gladby did not answer his
'phone, he could not be at home, and this, he learned later, was the
case, the physician being in a distant town on a consultation.

"My, this Butterfly seems big and clumsy beside my Humming-Bird," mused
Tom as he slid along through the air, now flying high and now low,
merely for practice. "This machine can go, but wait until I have my new
one in the air! Then I'll show 'em what speed is!"

He was soon at the physician's house, and found him in.

"Won't you ride back with me in the monoplane?" asked Tom. "I'm anxious
to have you see dad as soon as you can.

"Vot! Me drust mineself in one ob dem airships? I dinks not!" exclaimed
Dr. Kurtz ponderously. "Vy, I vould not efen ride in an outer-mobile,
yet, so vy should I go in von contrivance vot is efen more dangerous?
No, I gomes to your fader in der carriage, mit mine old Dobbin horse.
Dot vill not drop me to der ground, or run me up a tree, yet! Vot?"

"Very well," said Tom, "only hurry, please."

The young inventor, in his airship, reached home some time before the
slow-going doctor got there in his carriage. Mr. Swift was no worse,
Tom was glad to find, though he was evidently quite ill.

"So, ve must take goot care of him," said the doctor, when he had
examined the patient. "Dr. Gladby he has done much for him, und I can
do little more. You must dake care of yourself, Herr Swift, or you
vill--but den, vot is der use of being gloomy-minded? I am sure you
vill go more easy, und not vork so much."

"I haven't worked much," replied the aged inventor. "I have only been
helping my son on a new airship."

"Den dot must stop," insisted the doctor. "You must haf gomplete
rest--dot's it--gomplete rest."

"We'll do just as you say, doctor," said Tom. "We'll give up the
aeroplane matters, dad, and go away, you and I, where we can't see a
blueprint or a pattern, or hear the sound of machinery. We'll cut it
all out."

"Dot vould he goot," said Dr. Kurtz ponderously.

"No, I couldn't think of it," answered Mr. Swift. "I want you to go in
that race, Tom--and win!"

"But I'll not do it, dad, if you're going to be ill."

"He is ill now," interrupted the doctor. "Very ill, Dom Swift."

"That settles it. I don't go in the race. You and I'll go away, dad--to
California, or up in Canada. We'll travel for your health."

"No! no!" insisted the old inventor gently. "I will be all right. Most
of the work on the monoplane is done now, isn't it, Tom?"

"Yes, dad."

"Then you go on, and finish it. You and Mr. Jackson can do it without
me now. I'll take a rest, doctor, but I want my son to enter that race,
and, what's more, I want him to win!"

"Vell, if you don't vork, dot is all I ask. I must forbid you to do any
more. Mit Dom, dot is different. He is young und strong, und he can
vork. But you--not, Herr Swift, or I doctor you no more." And the
physician shook his big head.

"Very well. I'll agree to that if Tom will promise to enter the race,"
said the inventor.

"I will," said Tom.

The physician took his leave shortly after that, the medicine he gave
to Mr. Swift somewhat relieving him. Then the young inventor, who felt
in a little better spirits, went back to his workshop.

"Poor dad," he mused. "He thinks more of me and this aeroplane than he
does of himself. Well, I will go in the race, and I'll--yes, I'll win!"
And Tom looked very determined.

He was about to resume work on his craft when something about the way
one of the forward planes was tilted attracted his attention.

"I never left it that way," mused Tom. "Some one has been in here. I
wonder if it was Mr. Jackson?"

Tom stepped to the door and called for Eradicate. The colored man came
from the direction of the garden, which he was still weeding.

"Has Mr. Jackson been around, Rad?" asked the lad.

"No, sah. I ain't seed him."

"Have you been in here, looking at the Humming-Bird?"

"No, Massa Tom. I nebber goes in dere, lessen as how yo' is dere. Dem's
yo' orders."

"That's so, Rad. I might have known you wouldn't go in. But did you see
any one enter the shop?"

"Not a pusson, sab."

"Have you been here all the while?"

"All but jes' a few minutes, when I went to de barn to put some
liniment on Boomerang's so' foot."

"H'm! Some one might have slipped in here while I was away," mused Tom.
"I ought to have locked the doors, but I was in a hurry. This thing is
getting on my nerves. I wonder if it's Andy Foger, or some one else,
who is after my secret?"

He made a hasty examination of the shop, but could discover nothing
more wrong, except that one of the planes of the Humming-Bird had been
shifted.

"It looks as if they were trying to see how it was fastened on, and how
it worked," mused Tom. "But my plans haven't been touched, and no
damage has been done. Only I don't like to think that people have been
in here.  They may have stolen some of my ideas. I must keep this place
locked night and day after this."

Tom spent a busy week in making improvements on his craft. Mr. Swift
was doing well, and after a consultation by Dr. Kurtz and Dr. Gladby it
was decided to adopt a new style of treatment. In the meanwhile, Mr.
Swift kept his promise, and did no work. He sat in his easy-chair, out
in the garden, and dozed away, while Tom visited him frequently to see
if he needed anything.

"Poor old dad!" mused the young inventor. "I hope he is well enough to
come and see me try for the ten-thousand-dollar prize--and win it! I
hope I do; but if some one builds, from my stolen plans, a machine on
this model, I'll have my work cut out for me." And he gazed with pride
on the Humming-Bird.

For the past two weeks Tom had seen nothing of Andy Foger. The
red-haired bully seemed to have dropped out of sight, and even his
cronies, Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey, did not know where he had gone.

"I hope he has gone for good," said Ned Newton, who lived near Andy.
"He's an infernal nuisance. I wish he'd never come back to Shopton."

But Andy was destined to come back.

One day, when Tom was busy installing a wireless apparatus on his new
aeroplane, he heard Eradicate hurrying up the path that led to the shop.

"I wonder if dad is worse?" thought Tom, that always being his first
idea when he knew a summons was coming for him. Quickly be opened the
door.

"Some one's comin' out to see you, Massa Tom," said the colored man.

"Who is it?" asked the lad, taking the precaution to put his precious
plans out of sight.

"I dunno, sah; but yo' father knows him, an' he said fo' me to come out
heah, ahead ob de gen'man, an' tell yo' he were comin'. He'll be right
heah."

"Oh, well, if dad knows him, it's all right. Let him come, Rad."

"Yes, sah. Heah he comes." And the colored man pointed to a figure
advancing down the gravel path. Tom watched the stranger curiously.
There was something familiar about him, and Tom was sure he had met him
before, yet he could not seem to place him.

"How are you, Tom Swift?" greeted the newcomer pleasantly. "I guess
you've forgotten me, haven't you?" He held out his hand, which Tom
took.  "Don't know me, do you?" he went on.

"Well, I'm afraid I've forgotten your name," admitted the lad, just a
bit embarrassed. "But your face is familiar, somehow, and yet it isn't."

"I've shaved off my mustache," went on the other. "That makes a
difference. But you haven't forgotten John Sharp, the balloonist, whom
you rescued from Lake Carlopa, and who helped you build the Red Cloud?
You haven't forgotten John Sharp, have you, Tom?"

"Well, I should say not!" cried the lad heartily. "I'm real glad to see
you. What are you doing around here? Come in. I've got something to
show you," and he motioned to the shop where the Humming-Bird was
housed.

"Oh, I know what it is," said the veteran balloonist.

"You do?"

"Yes. It's your new aeroplane. In fact, I came to see you about it."

"To see me about it?"

"Yes. I'm one of the committee of arrangements for the meet to be held
at Eagle Park, where I understand you are going to contest. I came to
see how near you were ready, and to get you to make a formal entry of
your machine. Mr. Gunmore sent me."

"Oh, so you're in with them now, eh?" asked Tom. "Well, I'm glad to
know I've got a friend on the committee. Yes, my machine is getting
along very well. I'll soon be ready for a trial flight. Come in and
look at it. I think it's a bird--a regular Humming-Bird!" And Tom
laughed.

"It certainly is something new," admitted Mr. Sharp as his eyes took in
the details of the trim little craft. "By the way, Shopton is going to
be well represented at the meet."

"How is that? I thought I was the only one around here to enter an
aeroplane."

"No. We have just received an entry from Andy Foger."

"From Andy Foger!" gasped Tom. "Is he going to try to win some of the
prizes?"

"He's entered for the big one, the ten-thousand-dollar prize," replied
the balloonist. "He has made formal application to be allowed to
compete, and we have to accept any one who applies. Why, do you object
to him, Tom?"

"Object to him? Mr. Sharp, let me tell you something. Some time ago a
set of plans of my machine here were stolen from my house. I suspected
Andy Foger of taking them, but I could get no proof. Now you say he is
building a machine to compete for the big prize. Do you happen to know
what style it is?"

"It's a small monoplane, something like the Antoinette, his application
states, though he may change it later."

"Then he's stolen my ideas, and is making a craft like this!" exclaimed
Tom, as he sank upon a bench, and gazed from the balloonist to the
Humming-Bird, and back to Mr. Sharp again. "Andy Foger is trying to
beat me with my own machine!"




Chapter Seven

Seeking a Clue


John Sharp was more than surprised at the effect his piece of
information had on Tom Swift. Though the young inventor had all along
suspected Andy of having the missing plans, yet there had been no
positive evidence on this point. That, coupled with the fact that the
red-haired bully had not been seen in the vicinity of Shopton lately,
had, in a measure, lulled Tom's suspicions to rest, but now his hope
had been rudely shattered.

"Do you really think that's his game?" asked Mr. Sharp.

"I'm sure of it," replied the youth. "Though where he is building his
aeroplane I can't imagine, for I haven't seen him in town. He's away."

"Are you sure of that?"

"Well, not absolutely sure," replied Tom. "It's the general rumor that
he's out of town."

"Well, old General Rumor is sometimes a person not to be relied upon,"
remarked the balloonist grimly. "Now this is the way I size it up: Of
course, all I know officially is that Andy Foger has sent in an entry
for the big race for the ten-thousand-dollar prize which is offered by
the Eagle Park Aviation Association. I'm a member of the arrangements
committee, and so I know. I also know that you and several others are
going to try for the prize. That's all I am absolutely sure of.

"Now, when you tell me about the missing plans, and you conclude that
Andy is doing some underhanded work, I agree with you. But I go a step
farther. I don't believe he's out of town at all."

"Why not?" exclaimed Tom.

"Because when he has an airship shed right in his own backyard, where,
you tell me, he once made a craft in which he tried to beat you out in
the trip to Alaska, when you think of that, doesn't it seem reasonable
that he'd use that same building in which to make his new craft?"

"Yes, it does," admitted Tom slowly, "but then everybody says he's out
of town."

"Well, what everybody says is generally not so. I think you'll find
that Andy is keeping himself in seclusion, and that he's working
secretly in his shop, building a machine with which to beat you."

"Do you, really?"

"I certainly do. Have you been around his place lately?"

"No. I've been too busy; and then I never have much to do with him."

"Then take my advice, and see if you can't get a look inside that shop.
You may see something that will surprise you. If you find that Andy is
infringing on your patented ideas, you can stop him by an injunction.
You've got this model patented, I take it?"

"Oh, yes. I didn't have at the time the plans were stolen, but I've
patented it since. I could get at him that way."

"Then take my advice, and do it. Get a look inside that shed, and
you'll find Andy working secretly there, no matter if his cronies do
think he's out of town."

"I believe I will," agreed Tom, and somehow he felt better now that he
had decided on a plan of action. He and the balloonist talked over at
some length just the best way to go about it, for the young inventor
recalled the time when he and Ned Newton had endeavored to look into
Andy's shed, with somewhat disastrous results to themselves; but Tom
knew that the matter at stake justified a risk, and he was willing to
take it.

"Well, now that's settled," said Mr. Sharp, "tell me more about
yourself and your aeroplane. My! To think that the Red Cloud was
destroyed! That was a fine craft."

"Indeed she was," agreed Tom. "I'm going to make another on similar
lines, some day, but now all my time is occupied with the Humming-Bird."

"She is a hummer, too," complimented Mr. Sharp. "But I almost forgot
the real object of my trip here. There is no doubt about you going in
the race, is there?"

"I fully expect to," replied Tom. "The only thing that will prevent me
will be--"

"Don't say you're worried on account of what Andy Foger may do,"
interrupted Mr. Sharp.

"I'm not. I'll attend to Andy, all right. I was going to say that my
father's illness might interfere. He's not well at all. I'm quite
worried about him."

"Oh, I sincerely hope he'll be all right," remarked the balloonist. "We
want you in this race. In fact, we're going to feature you, as they say
about the actors and story-writers. The committee is planning to do
considerable advertising on the strength of Tom Swift, the well-known
young inventor, being a contestant for the ten-thousand-dollar prize."

"That's very nice, I'm sure," replied Tom, "and I'm going to do my
best.  Perhaps dad will take a turn for the better. He wants me to win
as much as I want to myself. Well, we'll not worry about it, anyhow,
until the time comes. I want to show you some new features of my latest
aeroplane."

"And I want to see them, Tom. Don't you think you're making a mistake,
though, in equipping it with a wireless outfit?"

"Why so?"

"Well, because it will add to the weight, and you want such a small
machine to be as light as possible."

"Yes, but you see I have a very light engine. That part my father
helped me with. In fact, it is the lightest air-cooled motor made, for
the amount of horsepower it develops, so I can afford to put on the
extra weight of the wireless outfit. I may need to signal when I am
flying along at a hundred miles an hour."

"That's so. Well, show me some of the other good points. You've
certainly got a wonderful craft here."

Tom and Mr. Sharp spent some time going over the Humming-Bird and in
talking over old times. The balloonist paid another visit to Mr. Swift,
who was feeling pretty good, and who expressed his pleasure in seeing
his old friend again.

"Can't you stay for a few days?" asked Tom, when Mr. Sharp was about to
leave. "If you wait long enough you may be able to help me work up the
clues against Andy Foger, and also witness a trial flight of the
Humming-Bird."

"I'd like to stay, but I can't," was the answer. "The committee will be
anxious for me to get back with my report. Good luck to you. I'll see
you at the time of the race, if not before."

Tom resolved to get right to work seeking clues against his old enemy,
Andy, but the next day Mr. Swift was not so well, and Tom had to remain
in the house. Then followed several days, during which time it was
necessary to do some important work on his craft, and so a week passed
without any information having been obtained.

In the meanwhile Tom had made some cautious inquiries, but had learned
nothing about Andy. He had no chance to interview Pete or Sam, the two
cronies, and he did not think it wise to make a bald request for
information at the Foger home.

Ned Newton could not be of any aid to his friend, as he was kept busy
in the bank night and day, working over a new set of books.

"I wonder how I can find out what I want to know?" mused Tom one
afternoon, when he had done considerable work on the Humming-Bird. "I
certainly ought to do it soon, so as to be able to stop Andy if he's
infringing on my patents. Yet, I don't see how--"

His thoughts were interrupted by hearing a voice outside the shop,
exclaiming:

"Bless my toothpick! I know the way, Eradicate, my good fellow. It
isn't necessary for you to come. As long as Tom Swift is out there,
I'll find him. Bless my horizontal rudder! I'm anxious to see what
progress he's made. I'll find him, if he's about!"

"Yes, sah, he's right in dere," spoke the colored man. "He's workin' on
dat Dragon Fly of his." Eradicate did not always get his names right.

"Mr. Damon!" exclaimed Tom in delight, at the sound of his friend's
voice. "I believe he can help me get evidence against Andy Foger. I
wonder I didn't think of it before! The very thing! I'll do it!"




Chapter Eight

The Empty Shed


"Bless my dark-lantern! Where are you, Tom?" called Mr. Damon as he
entered the dim shed where the somewhat frail-appearing aeroplane
loomed up in the semi-darkness, for it was afternoon, and rather
cloudy. "Where are you?"

"Here!" called the young inventor. "I'm glad to see you! Come in!"

"Ah! there it is, eh?" exclaimed the odd man, as he looked at the
aeroplane, for there had been much work done on it since he had last
seen it. "Bless my parachute, Tom! But it looks as though you could
blow it over."

"It's stronger than it seems," replied the lad. "But, Mr. Damon, I've
got something very important to talk to you about."

Thereupon Tom told all about Mr. Sharp's visit, of Andy's entry in the
big race, and of the suspicions of himself and the balloonist.

"And what is it you wish me to do?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Work up some clues against Andy Foger."

"Good! I'll do it! I'd like to get ahead of that bully and his father,
who once tried to wreck the bank I'm interested in. I'll help you, Tom!
I'll play detective! Let me see--what disguise shall I assume? I think
I'll take the part of a tramp. Bless my ham sandwich! That will be the
very thing. I'll get some ragged clothes, let my beard grow again--you
see I shaved it off since my last visit--and I'll go around to the
Foger place and ask for work. Then I can get inside the shed and look
around.  How's that for a plan?"

"It might be all right," agreed Tom, "only I don't believe you're cut
out for the part of a tramp, Mr. Damon."

"Bless my fingernails! Why not?"

"Oh, well, it isn't very pleasant to go around in ragged clothes."

"Don't mind about me. I'll do it." And the odd gentleman seemed quite
delighted at the idea. He and Tom talked it over at some length, and
then adjourned to the house, where Mr. Swift, who had seemed to improve
in the last few days, was told of the plan.

"Couldn't you go around after evidence just as you are?" asked the aged
inventor. "I don't much care for this disguising business."

"Oh, it's very necessary," insisted Mr. Damon earnestly. "Bless my
gizzard! but it's very necessary. Why, if I went around the Foger place
as I am now, they'd know me in a minute, and I couldn't find out what I
want to know."

"Well, if you keep on blessing yourself," said Tom, with a laugh,
"they'll know you, no matter what disguise you put on, Mr. Damon."

"That's so," admitted the eccentric gentleman. "I must break myself of
that habit. I will. Bless my topknot! I'll never do it any more. Bless
my trousers buttons!"

"I'm afraid you'll never do it!" exclaimed Tom.

"It is rather hard," said Mr. Damon ruefully, as he realized what he
had said. "But I'll do it. Bless--"

He paused a moment, looked at Tom and his father, and then burst into a
laugh. The habit was more firmly fastened on him than he was aware.

For several hours Tom, his father and Mr. Damon discussed various
methods of proceeding, and it was finally agreed that Mr. Damon should
first try to learn what Andy was doing, if anything, without resorting
to a disguise.

"Then, if that doesn't work, I'll become a tramp," was the decision of
the odd character. "I'll wear the raggedest clothes I can find Bless--"
But he stopped in time.

Mr. Damon took up his residence in the Swift household, as he had often
done before, and for the next week he went and came as he pleased,
sometimes being away all night.

"It's no use, though," declared Mr. Damon at the end of the week. "I
can't get anywhere near that shed, nor even get a glimpse inside of it.
I haven't been able to learn anything, either. There are two gardeners
on guard all the while, and several times when I've tried to go in the
side gate, they've stopped me."

"Isn't there any news of Andy about town?" asked Tom. "I should think
Sam or Pete would know where he is."

"Well, I didn't ask them, for they'd know right away why I was
inquiring," said Mr. Damon, "but it seems to me as if there was
something queer going on. If Andy Foger is working in that shed of his,
he's keeping mighty quiet about it. Bless my--"

And once more he stopped in time. He was conquering the habit in a
measure.

"Well, what do you propose to do next?" asked Tom.

"Disguise myself like a tramp, and go there looking for work," was the
firm answer. "There are plenty of odd jobs on a big place such as the
Foger family have. I'll find out what I want to know, you see."

It seemed useless to further combat this resolution, and, in a few days
Mr. Damon presented a very different appearance. He had on a most
ragged suit, there was a scrubby beard on his face, and he walked with
a curious shuffle, caused by a pair of big, heavy shoes which he had
donned, first having taken the precaution to make holes in them and get
them muddy.

"Now I'm all ready," he said to Tom one day, when his disguise was
complete. "I'm going over and try my luck."

He left the house by a side door, so that no one would see him, and
started down the walk. As he did so a voice shouted:

"Hi, there! Git right out oh heah! Mistah Swift doan't allow no tramps
heah, an' we ain't got no wuk fo' yo', an' there ain't no cold
victuals.  I does all de wuk, me an' mah mule Boomerang, an' we takes
all de cold victuals, too! Git right along, now!"

"It's Eradicate. He doesn't know you," said Tom, with a chuckle.

"So much the better," whispered Mr. Damon. But the disguise proved
almost too much of a success, for seeing the supposed tramp lingering
near the house, Eradicate caught up a stout stick and rushed forward.
He was about to strike the ragged man, when Tom called out:

"That's Mr. Damon, Rad!"

"Wh--what!" gasped the colored man; and when the situation had been
explained to him, and the necessity for silence impressed upon him, he
turned away, too surprised to utter a word. He sought consolation in
the stable with his mule.

Just what methods Mr. Damon used he never disclosed, but one thing is
certain: That night there came a cautious knock on the door of the
Swift home, and Tom, answering it, beheld his odd friend.

"Well," he asked eagerly, "what luck?"

"Put on a suit of old clothes, and come with me," said Mr. Damon.
"We'll look like two tramps, and then, if we're discovered, they won't
know it was you."

"Have you found out anything?" asked Tom eagerly.

"Not yet; but I've got a key to one of the side doors of the shed, and
we can get in as soon as it's late enough so that everybody there will
be in bed."

"A key? How did you get it?" inquired the youth.

"Never mind," was the answer, with a chuckle. "That was because of my
disguise; and I haven't blessed anything to-day. I'm going to, soon,
though. I can feel it coming on. But hurry, Tom, or we may be too late."

"And you haven't had a look inside the shed?" asked the young inventor.
"You don't know what's there?"

"No; but we soon will."

Eagerly Tom put on some of the oldest and most ragged garments he could
find, and then he and the odd gentleman set off toward the Foger home.
They waited some time after getting in sight of it, because they saw a
light in one of the windows. Then, when the house was dark, they stole
cautiously forward toward the big, gloomy shed.

"On this side," directed Mr. Damon in a whisper. "The key I have opens
this door."

"But we can't see when we get inside," objected Tom. "I should have
brought a dark lantern."

"I have one of those pocket electric flashlights," said Mr. Damon.
"Bless my candlestick! but I thought of that." And he chuckled
gleefully.

Cautiously they advanced in the darkness. Mr. Damon fumbled at the lock
of the door. The key grated as he turned it. The portal swung back, and
Tom and his friend found themselves inside the shed which, of late, had
been such an object of worry and conjecture to the young inventor. What
would he find there?

"Flash the light," he called to Mr. Damon in a hoarse whisper.

The eccentric man drew it from his packet. He pressed the spring switch,
and in an instant a brilliant shaft of radiance shot out, cutting the
intense blackness like a knife. Mr. Damon flashed it on all sides.

But to the amazement of Tom and his companion, it did not illuminate
the broad white wings and stretches of canvas of an aeroplane. It only
shone on the bare walls of the shed, and on some piles of rubbish in
the corners. Up and down, to right and left, shot the pencil of light.

"There's--there's nothing here!" gasped Tom.

"I--I guess you're right!" agreed Mr. Damon "The shed is empty!"

"Then where is Andy Foger building his aeroplane?" asked Tom in a
whisper; but Mr. Damon could not answer him.




Chapter Nine

A Trial Flight


For a few moments after their exclamations of surprise Tom and Mr.
Damon did not know what else to say. They stared about in amazement,
hardly able to believe that the shed could be empty. They had expected
to see some form of aeroplane in it, and Tom was almost sure his eyes
would meet a reproduction of his Humming-Bird, made from the stolen
plans.

"Can it be possible there's nothing here?" went on Tom, after a long
pause. He could not seem to believe it.

"Evidently not," answered Mr. Damon, as he advanced toward the center
of the big building and flashed the light on all sides. "You can see
for yourself."

"Or, rather, you can't see," spoke the youth. "It isn't here, that's
sure. You can't stick an aeroplane, even as small a one as my Humming
Bird, in a corner. No; it isn't here."

"Well, we'll have to look further," went on Mr. Damon. "I think--"

But a sudden noise near the big main doors of the shed interrupted him.

"Come on!" exclaimed Tom in a whisper. "Some one's coming! They may see
us! Let's get out!"

Mr. Damon released the pressure on the spring switch, and the light
went out. After waiting a moment to let their eyes become accustomed to
the darkness, he and Tom stole to the door by which they had entered.
As they swung it cautiously open they again heard the noise near the
main portals by which Andy had formerly taken in and out the Anthony,
as he had named the aeroplane in which he and his father went to
Alaska, where, like Tom's craft, it was wrecked.

"Some one is coming in!" whispered Tom.

Hardly had he spoken when a light shone in the direction of the sound.
The illumination came from a big lantern of the ordinary kind, carried
by some one who had just entered the shed.

"Can you see who it is?" whispered Mr. Damon, peering eagerly forward;
too eagerly, for his foot struck against the wooden side wall with a
loud bang.

"Who's there?" suddenly demanded the person carrying the lantern.

He raised it high above his head, in order to cast the gleams into all
the distant corners. As he did so a ray of light fell upon his face.
"Andy Foger!" gasped Tom in a hoarse whisper.

Andy must have heard, for he ran forward just as Tom and Mr. Damon
slipped out.

"Hold on! Who are you?" came in the unmistakable tones of the
red-haired bully.

"I don't think we're going to tell," chuckled Tom softly, as he and his
friend sped off into the darkness. They were not followed, and as they
looked back they could see a light bobbing about in the shed.

"He's looking for us!" exclaimed Mr. Damon with an inward laugh. "Bless
my watch chain! But it's a good thing we got in ahead of him. Are you
sure it was Andy himself?"

"Sure! I'd know his face anywhere. But I can't understand it. Where has
he been? What is he doing? Where is he building his aeroplane? I
thought he was out of town."

"He may have come back to-night," said Mr. Damon. "That's the only one
of your questions I can answer. We'll have to wait about the rest, I'm
sure he wasn't around the house to-day, though, for I was working at
weeding the flower beds, in my disguise as a tramp, and if he was home
I'd have seen him. He must have just come back, and he went out to his
shed to get something. Well, we did the best we could."

"Indeed we did," agreed Tom, "and I'm ever so much obliged to you, Mr.
Damon."

"And we'll try again, when we get more clues. Bless my shoelaces! but
it's a relief to be able to talk as you like."

And forthwith the eccentric man began to call down so many blessings on
himself and on his belongings, no less than on his friends, that Tom
laughingly warned him that he had better save some for another time.

The two reached home safely, removed their "disguises," and told Mr.
Swift of the result of their trip. He agreed with them that there was a
mystery about Andy's aeroplane which was yet to be solved.

But Tom was glad to find that, at any rate, the craft was not being
made in Shopton, and during the next two weeks he devoted all his time
to finishing his own machine. Mr. Jackson was a valuable assistant, and
Mr. Damon gave what aid he could.

"Well, I think I'll be ready for a trial flight in another week," said
Tom one day, as he stepped back to get a view of the almost completed
Humming-Bird.

"Shall you want a passenger?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Yes, I wish you would take a chance with me. I could use a bag of
sand, not that I mean you are to be compared to that," added Tom
quickly, "but I'd rather have a real person, in order to test the
balancing apparatus.  Yes, we'll make a trial trip together."

In the following few days Tom went carefully over the aeroplane, making
some slight changes, strengthening it here and there, and testing the
motor thoroughly. It seemed to work perfectly.

At length the day of the trial came, and the Humming-Bird was wheeled
out of the shed. In spite of the fact that it was practically finished,
there yet remained much to do on it. It was not painted or decorated,
and looked rather crude. But what Tom wanted to know was how it would
fly, what control he had over it, what speed it could make, and how it
balanced. For it was, at best, very frail, and the least change in
equilibrium might be fatal.

Before taking his place in the operator's seat Tom started the motor,
and by means of a spring balance tested the thrust of the propellers.
It was satisfactory, though he knew that when the engine had been run
for some time, and had warmed up, it would do much better.

"All ready, I guess, Mr. Damon!" he called, and the odd gentleman took
his place. Tom got up into his own seat, in front of several wheels and
levers by which he operated the craft.

"Start the propeller!" he requested of Mr. Jackson, and soon the motor
was spitting fire, while the big, fan-like blades were whirring around
like wings of light. The engineer and Eradicate were holding back the
Humming-Bird.

"Let her go!" cried Tom as he turned on more gasoline and further
advanced the spark of the motor. The roar increased, the propeller
looked like a solid circle of wood, and the trim little monoplane moved
slowly across the rising ground, increasing its speed every second,
until, like some graceful bird, it suddenly rose in the air as Tom
tilted the wing tips, and soared splendidly aloft!




Chapter Ten

A Midnight Intruder


Tom Swift sent his wonderful little craft upward on a gentle slant.
Higher and higher it rose above the ground. Now it topped the trees;
now it was well over them.

On the earth below stood Mr. Swift, Mr. Jackson, Eradicate and Mrs.
Baggert. They were the only witnesses of the trial flight, and as the
aged inventor saw his son's latest design in aeroplanes circling in the
air he gave a cheer of delight. It was too feeble for Tom to hear, but
the lad, glancing down, saw his father waving his hand to him.

"Dear old dad!" thought Tom, waving in return. "I hope he's well enough
to see me win the big prize."

Tom and Mr. Damon went skimming easily through the air, at no great
speed, to be sure, for the young inventor did not want to put too
sudden a strain on his motor.

"This is glorious!" cried the odd gentleman. "I never shall have enough
of aeroplaning, Tom!"

"Nor I, either," added his companion. "But how do you like it? Don't
you think it's an improvement on my Butterfly, Mr. Damon?"

"It certainly is. You're a wonder, Tom! Look out! What are you up to?"
for the machine had suddenly swerved in a startling manner.

"Oh, that's just a new kind of spiral dip I was trying," answered Tom.
"I couldn't do that with my other machine, for I couldn't turn sharp
enough."

"Well, don't do it right away again," begged Mr. Damon, who had turned
a little white, and whose breath was coming in gasps, even though he
was used to hair-raising stunts in the frail craft of the air.

Tom did not take his machine far away, for he did not want to exhibit
it to the public yet, and he preferred to remain in the vicinity of his
home, in case of any accident. So he circled around, did figures of
eight, went up and down on long slants, took sharp turns, and gave the
craft a good tryout.

"Does it satisfy you?" asked Mr. Damon, when Tom had once more made the
spiral dip, but not at high speed.

"In a way, yes," was the answer. "I see a chance for several changes
and improvements. Of course, I know nothing about the speed yet, and
that's something that I'm anxious about, for I built this with the idea
of breaking all records, and nothing else. I know, now, that I can
construct a craft that will successfully navigate the air; in fact,
there are any number of people who can do that; but to construct a
monoplane that will beat anything ever before made is a different
thing.  I don't yet know that I have done it."

"When will you?"

"Oh, when I make some changes, get the motor tuned up better, and let
her out for all she's worth. I want to do a hundred miles an hour, at
least. I'll arrange for a speedy flight in about two weeks more."

"Then I think I will stay home," said Mr. Damon.

"No; I'll need you," insisted Tom, laughing. "Now watch. I'm going to
let her out just a little."

He did, with the result that they skimmed through the air so fast that
Mr. Damon's breath became a mere series of gasps.

"We'll have to wear goggles and mouth protectors when we really go
fast!" yelled Tom above the noise of the motor, as he slowed down and
turned about for home.

"Go fast! Wasn't that fast?" asked Mr. Damon.

Tom shook his head.

"You wait, and you'll see," he announced.

They made a good landing, and Mr. Swift hastened up to congratulate his
son.

"I knew you could do it, Tom!" he cried.

"I couldn't, though, if it hadn't been for that wonderful engine of
yours, dad! How do you feel?"

"Pretty good. Oh! but that's a fine machine, Tom!"

"It certainly is," agreed Mr. Jackson.

"It will be when I have it in better trim," admitted the young inventor
modestly.

"By golly!" cried Eradicate, who was grinning almost from ear to ear,
"I's proud oh yo', Massa Tom, an' so will mah mule Boomerang be, when I
tells him. Yes, sah, dat's what he will be--proud ob yo', Massa Tom!"

"Thanks, Rad."

"Well, some folks is satisfied with mighty little under 'em, when they
go up in the air, that's my opinion," said Mrs. Baggert.

"Why, wouldn't you ride in this?" asked Tom of the buxom housekeeper.

"Not if you was to give me ten thousand dollars!" she cried firmly.
"Oh, dear! I think the potatoes are burning!" And she rushed back into
the house.

The next day Tom started to work overhauling the Humming-Bird, and
making some changes. He altered the wing tips slightly, and adjusted
the motor, until in a thrust test it developed nearly half again as
much power as formerly.

"And I'll need it all," declared Tom as he thought of the number of
contestants that had entered the great race.

For the Eagle Park meet was to be a large and important one, and the
principal "bird-men" of the world were to have a part in it. Tom knew
that he must do his very best, and he spared no efforts to make his
monoplane come up to his ideal, which was a very exacting one.

"We'll have a real speed test to-morrow," Tom announced to Mr. Damon
one night. "I'll see what the Humming-Bird can really do. You'll come,
won't you?"

"Oh, I suppose so. Bless my insurance policy! I might as well take the
same chance you do. But if you're going to have such a nerve-racking
thing as that on the program, you'd better get to bed early and have
plenty of sleep."

"Oh, I'm not tired. I think I'll go out this evening."

"Where?"

"Oh, just around town, to see some of the fellows." But if Tom was only
going around town merely to see his male friends, why did he dress so
carefully, put on a new necktie, and take several looks in the glass
before he went out? We think you can guess, and also the girl's name.

The young inventor got in rather late, and after a visit to the
aeroplane shed, to see that all was right there, he went to bed, first
connecting up the burglar-alarm wires that guarded the doors and
windows of the aerodrome.

How long he had been asleep Tom did not know, but he was suddenly
awakened by hearing the buzzing of the alarm at the head of his bed. At
first he took it for the droning and humming of the aeroplane motor, as
he had a hazy notion, and a sort of dream, that he was in his craft.

Then, with a start, he realized what it was--the burglar alarm.

"Some one's in the shed!" he gasped.

Out of bed he leaped, drawing on his trousers and coat, and putting on
a pair of slippers, with speed worthy of a fireman. He grabbed up a
revolver and rushed from his room, pounding on the door of Mr.
Jackson's apartment in passing.

"Some one in the shed, after the Humming-Bird!" shouted Tom. "Get a
gun, and come down!"




Chapter Eleven

Tom Is Hurt


As Tom passed down the hall on his way to the side door, from which he
could more quickly reach the aeroplane shed, he saw his father coming
from his room.

"What's the matter? What is it?" asked Mr. Swift, and alarm showed on
his pale face.

"It's nothing much, dad," said the youth, as quietly as he could, for
he realized that to excite his father might have a bad effect on the
invalid.

"Then why are you in such a hurry? Why have you that revolver? I know
there is something wrong, Tom. I am going to help you!"

In his father's present weakened state Tom desired this least of all,
so he said:

"Now, never mind, dad. I thought I heard a noise out in the yard, and
I'm not going to take any chances. So I roused Mr. Jackson, and I'm
going down to see what it is. Perhaps it may only be Eradicate's mule,
Boomerang, kicking around, or it may be Rad himself, or some one after
his chickens. Don't worry. Mr. Jackson and I can attend to it. You go
back to bed, father."

Tom spoke with such assurance that Mr. Swift believed him, and retired
to his room, just as the engineer, partly dressed, came hurrying out in
response to Tom's summons. He had his rifle, and, had the invalid
inventor seen that, he surely would have worried more.

"Come on!" whispered Tom. "Don't make any noise. I don't want to excite
my father."

"What was it?" asked the engineer.

"I don't know. Burglar alarm went off, that's all I can say until we
get to the shed."

Together the two left the house softly, and soon were hurrying toward
the aeroplane shed.

"Look!" exclaimed Mr. Jackson. "Didn't you see a light just then, Tom?"

"Where?"

"By the side window of the shed?"

"No, I didn't notice it! Oh, yes! There it is! Some one is in there! If
it's Andy Foger, I'll have him arrested, sure!"

"Maybe we can't catch him."

"That's so. Andy is a pretty slippery customer. Say, Mr. Jackson, you
go around and get Eradicate, and have him bring a club. We can't trust
him with a gun. Tell him to get at the back door, and I'll wait for you
to join me, and we'll go in the front door. Then we'll have 'em between
two fires. They can't get away."

"How about the windows?"

"They're high up, and hard to open since I put the new catches on them.
Whoever got in must have forced the lock of the door. There goes the
light again!"

As Tom spoke there was seen the faint glimmer of a light. It moved
slowly about the interior of the shed, and with a peculiar bobbing
motion, which indicated that some one was carrying it.

"Go for Eradicate, and don't make any more noise than you can help in
waking him up," whispered Tom, for they were now close to the shed, and
might be heard.

Mr. Jackson slipped off in the darkness, and Tom drew nearer to the
building that housed his Humming-Bird. There was one window lower than
the others, and near it was a box, that Tom remembered having seen that
afternoon. He planned to get up on that and look in, before making a
raid to capture the intruder.

Tom raised himself up to the window. The light had been visible a
moment before he placed the box in position, but an instant later it
seemed to go out, and the place was in darkness.

"I wonder if they've gone away?" thought Tom. "I can't hear any noise."

He listened intently. It was dark and silent in the shop. Suddenly the
light flashed up brighter than before, and the young inventor caught
sight of a man walking around the new aeroplane, examining it
carefully.  He carried, as Tom could see, a large-sized electric
flash-lamp, with a brilliant tungsten filament, which gave a powerful
light.

As the youth watched, he saw the intruder place the light on a bench,
in such a position that the rays fell full upon the Humming-Bird. Then,
adjusting the spring switch so that the light would continue to glow,
the man stepped back and drew something from an inner pocket.

"I wonder what he's up to?" mused Tom. "I wish Eradicate and Mr.
Jackson would hurry back. Who can that fellow be, I wonder? I've never
seen him before, as far as I know. I thought sure it was going to turn
out to be Andy Foger!"

Tom turned around to look into the dark yard surrounding the shed. He
was anxious to hear the approach of his two allies, but there was no
sound of their footsteps.

As he turned back to watch the man he could not repress a cry of alarm,
for what the intruder had drawn from his pocket was a small hatchet,
and he was advancing with it toward the Humming-Bird!

"He's going to destroy my aeroplane!" gasped Tom, and he raised his
revolver to fire.

He did not intend to shoot at the man, but only to fire to scare him,
and thus hasten the coming of Mr. Jackson and the colored man. But
there was no need of this, for an instant later the two came running up
silently, Eradicate with a big club.

"Whar am he?" he asked in a hoarse whisper. "Let me git at him, Massa
Tom!"

"Hush!" exclaimed the young inventor. "We have no time to lose! He's in
there, getting ready to chop my aeroplane to bits! Go to the back door,
Rad, and if he tries to come out don't let him get away."

"I won't!" declared the colored man emphatically, and he shook his club
suggestively.

"Come on! We'll go in the front door," whispered Tom to the engineer.
"I have the key. We'll catch him red-handed, and hand him over to the
police."

Waiting a few seconds, to enable Eradicate to get to his place, Tom and
the engineer stole softly toward the big double doors. Every moment the
youth expected to hear the crash of the hatchet on his prize machine.
He shivered in anticipation, but the blows did not fall.

Tom pushed open the door and stepped inside, followed by Mr. Jackson.
As they did so they saw the man standing in front of the Humming-Bird.
He again raised the little hatchet, which was like an Indian tomahawk,
and poised it for an instant over the delicate framework and planes of
the air craft. Then his arm began to descend.

"Stop!" yelled Tom, and at the same time he fired in the air.

The man turned as suddenly as though a bullet had struck him, and for a
moment Tom was afraid lest he had hit him by accident; but an instant
later the intruder grabbed up his flashlight, and holding it before
him, so that its rays shone full on Tom and Mr. Jackson, while it left
him in the shadow, sprang toward them, the hatchet still in his hand.

"Look out, Tom!" cried Mr. Jackson.

"Out of my way!" shouted the man.

Bravely Tom stood his ground. He wished now that he had a club instead
of his revolver. The would-be vandal was almost upon him. Mr. Jackson
clubbed his rifle and swung it at the fellow. The latter dodged, and
came straight at Tom.

"Look out!" yelled the engineer again, but it was too late. There was
the sound of a blow, and Tom went down like a log. Then the place was
in darkness, and the sound of footsteps in rapid flight could be heard
outside the shed.

The intruder, after wounding the young inventor, had made his escape.




Chapter Twelve

Miss Nestor Calls


"What's de mattah? Shall I come in? Am anybody hurted?" yelled
Eradicate Sampson as he pounded on the rear door of the aeroplane shed.
"Let me in, Massa Tom!"

"All right! Wait a minute! I'm coming!" called Mr. Jackson. He tried to
peer through the darkness, to where a huddled heap indicated the
presence of Tom. Then he thought of the electric lights, which were run
by a storage battery when the dynamo was shut down, and a moment later
the engineer had switched on the incandescents, filling the big shed
with radiance.

"Tom, are you badly hurt?" gasped Mr. Jackson.

There was no answer, for Tom was unconscious.

"Let me in! Let me git at dat robber wif mah club!" cried the colored
man eagerly.

Knowing that he would need help in carrying Tom to the house, Mr.
Jackson hurried to the back door. He had a key to it, and it was
quicker to open it than to send Eradicate away around the shed to the
front portals.

"Whar am he?" gasped the faithful darky, as he took a firmer grasp of
his club and looked around the place. "Let me git mah hands on him!
I'll feed him t' Boomerang, when I gits froo wif him!"

"He's gone," said the engineer. "Help me look after Tom. I'm afraid
he's badly hurt."

They hastened to the unconscious lad. On one side of his head was a bad
cut, which was bleeding freely.

"Oh! he's daid! I know he's daid!" wailed Eradicate.

"Not a bit of it. He isn't dead, but he may die, if we don't get him
into the house, and have a doctor here soon," said Mr. Jackson sternly.
"Catch hold of him, Rad, and, mind, don't carry on, and get excited,
and scare Mr. Swift. Just pretend it isn't very bad, or we'll have two
patients on our hands instead of only Tom."

They managed to get the youth into the house, and, contrary to their
fears, Mr. Swift was not nearly so nervous as they had expected. Calmly
he took charge of matters, and even telephoned for Dr. Gladby himself,
while Mr. Jackson and Eradicate undressed Tom and got him to bed. Mrs.
Baggert busied herself heating water and getting things in readiness
for the doctor, who had promised to come at once.

Tom was just regaining consciousness when the physician came in, having
driven over at top speed.

"What--what happened? Did the Humming-Bird fall?" asked Tom in a
whisper, putting his hand to his head.

"No, something fell on you, I guess," said the doctor, who had been
hurriedly told of the circumstances. "But don't worry, Tom. You'll be
all right in a few days. You got a bad cut on the head, but the skull
isn't fractured, I'm glad to say. Here, now, just drink this," and he
gave Tom some medicine he had mixed in a glass.

The cut was soon dressed, and Tom felt much better, though weak and a
trifle dizzy.

"Did he hit me with the hatchet?" he asked Mr. Jackson.

"I couldn't tell," was the engineer's reply, "it all happened so
quickly. In another instant I'd have bowled him over, instead of him
landing on you, but I just missed him. He either used the hatchet, or
some blunt instrument."

"Well, don't talk about it now," urged the doctor. "I want Tom to get
quiet and go to sleep. He'll be much better in the morning, but I must
forbid any aeroplane flights." And he shook his finger at Tom in
warning. "You'll have to lie quiet for several days," he added.

"All right," agreed the young inventor weakly, and then he dozed off,
for the physician had given him a quieting medicine.

"Haven't you any idea who it was?" asked Dr. Gladby of Mr. Jackson, as
he prepared to leave.

"Not the slightest. It was no one Tom or I had ever seen before. But
whoever it was, he intended to destroy the Humming-Bird, that was
evident!"

"The scoundrel! I'm glad you foiled him in time; but it's too bad about
Tom. However, we'll soon have him all right again."

"I knows who done it!" broke in Eradicate, who was a sort of privileged
character about the Swift home.

"Who?" asked Mr. Jackson.

"It were dat Andy Foger. Leastways, he send dat man heah t' make
mincemeat oh de Hummin'-Bird. I's positib 'bout dat, so I am!" And
Eradicate grinned triumphantly.

"Well, perhaps Andy did have a hand in it," admitted Mr. Swift, "but we
have no proof of it, I can't see what his object would be in wanting to
destroy Tom's new craft."

"Pure meanness. Afraid that Tom will beat him in the race," suggested
Mr. Jackson.

"It's too big a risk to take," went on the aged inventor. "I'm inclined
to think it might be one of the gang of men who made the diamonds in
the cave in the mountains. They might have sent a spy on East, and he
might try to damage the aeroplane to be revenged for what Tom and Mr.
Jenks did to them."

"It's possible," agreed the engineer. "Well, we'll wait until Tom can
talk, and we'll go over it with him."

"Not until he is stronger, though," stipulated the physician as he went
away. "Don't excite Tom for a few days."

The young inventor was much better the following day, and when Dr.
Gladby called he said Tom could sit up for a little while. Two days
later Tom was well enough to be talked to, and his father and Mr.
Jackson went over all the details of the matter. Mr. Damon, who had
returned home, came to see his friend as soon as he heard of his
plight, and was also a member of the consulting party.

"Bless my dictionary!" exclaimed the eccentric man. "I wish I had been
here to take a hand in it. But, Tom, do you believe it was one of the
diamond-making gang?"

"I hardly think so," was the reply. "They would take some other means
of revenge than by destroying my new aeroplane. I'm inclined to think
it was some one who is in with Andy Foger."

"Then we'll hire detectives, and locate him and them," declared Mr.
Damon, blessing several things in succession.

Tom, however, did not like that plan, and it was decided to do nothing
right away. In another few days Tom was able to be up, though he was
still a semi-invalid, not venturing out of the house.

It was one afternoon, when, rather tired of his confinement, he was
wishing he could resume work on his air craft, that Mrs. Baggert came
in, and said:

"Some one to see you, Tom."

"Is it Mr. Damon?"

"No, it's a lady. She--"

"Oh, Tom! How are you?" cried a girlish voice, and Mary Nestor walked
into the room, holding out both hands to the young inventor. Tom, with
a blush, arose hastily.

"No! no! Sit still!" commanded the girl. "Oh! I'm so sorry to hear
about your accident! In fact, I only heard this morning. We've been
away, mamma and I, and we just got back. Tell me all about it, that is,
if you feel able. But don't exert yourself. Oh! I wish I had hold of
that man!"

And Miss Nestor clenched her two pretty little hands and set her white,
even teeth grimly together, as though she would do most desperate
things indeed.

"I wish you did, too!" exclaimed Tom. "That is, so you could hold him
until I had a chance at him. But I'm all right now. It was very good of
you to call. How are you, and how are your folks?"

"Very well. But I came to hear about you. Tell me," and she looked
anxiously at Tom, while Mrs. Baggert discreetly withdrew to the
adjoining room, and made a great noise, rattling papers and moving
chairs about.

Thereupon Tom told what had happened, while Mary Nestor listened
interestedly and with expressions of fear at times.

"But if Andy had anything to do with it," concluded Tom, "I can't
understand what his object is. Andy is acting very strangely lately. We
can't locate him, nor find out where he is building his airship. That's
what I want to know; but Mr. Damon and I, after a lot of trouble, only
found his aeroplane shed empty."

"And you want to find out where Andy Foger is building his aeroplane
which he has entered in the big race?" asked Miss Nestor.

"That's what I'd like to know," declared Tom earnestly. "Only we can't
seem to do it. No one knows."

"Why don't you write to Mr. Sharp, or some one of the aviation meet
committee?" asked the girl simply. "They would know, for you say Andy
made his formal entry with them, and the rules require him to tell from
what city and State he will enter his craft. Write to the committee,
Tom."

For a moment the young inventor stared at her. Then he banged his fist
down on the arm of his chair.

"By Jove, Mary! That's the very thing!" he cried. "I wonder why I never
thought of that, instead of fiddling around in disguises, and things
like that? I wonder why I never thought of that plan?"

"Perhaps because it was so simple," she answered, with a pretty blush.

"I guess that's it," agreed Tom. "It takes a woman to jump across a
bridge to a conclusion every time. I'll write to Mr. Sharp at once."




Chapter Thirteen

A Clash with Andy


Tom lost no time in writing to Mr. Sharp. He wondered more and more at
his own neglect in not before having asked the balloonist, when the
latter was in Shopton, where Andy was building his aeroplane. But, as
it developed later, Mr. Sharp did not know at that time.

While waiting for a reply to his letter, Tom busied himself about his
own craft, making several changes he had decided on. He also began to
paint and decorate it, for he wanted to have the Humming-Bird present a
neat appearance when she was officially entered in the great race.

Miss Nestor called on Tom again, and Mr. Damon was a frequent visitor.
He agreed to accompany Tom to the aviation park when it was time for
the race, and also to be a passenger in the ten-thousand-dollar contest.

"It must be perfectly wonderful to fly through the air," said Miss
Nestor one day, when Tom and Mr. Damon had the Humming-Bird out on the
testing ground, trying the engine, which had been keyed up to a higher
pitch of speed. "I consider it perfectly marvelous, and I can't imagine
how it must seem to skim along that way."

"Come and try it," urged Tom suddenly. "There's not a bit of danger.
Really there isn't."

"Oh! I'd never dare do it!" replied the girl, with a gasp. "That
machine is too swift by name and swift by nature for me."

"Why don't you take Miss Nestor on a grass-cutting flight, Tom?"
suggested Mr. Damon. "Bless my lawn mower! but she wouldn't be
frightened at that."

"Grass cutting?" repeated the girl. "What in the world does that mean?"

"It means skimming along a few feet up in the air," answered the young
inventor, who had now fully recovered from the effects of the blow
given him by the midnight intruder. In spite of many inquiries, no
clues to his identity had been obtained.

"How high do you go when you 'cut grass,' as you call it?" asked Miss
Nestor, and Tom thought he detected a note of eager curiosity in her
voice.

"Not high at all," he said. "In fact, sometimes I do cut off the tops
of tall daisies. Come, Mary! Won't you try that? I know you'll like it,
and when you've been over the lawn a few times you'll be ready for a
high flight. Come! there's no danger."

"I--I almost believe I will," she said hesitatingly. "Will you take me
down when I want to come?"

"Of course," said Tom. "Get in, and we'll start."

The Humming-Bird was all ready for a trial flight, and Tom was glad of
the chance to test it, especially with such a pretty passenger as was
Miss Nestor.

"Bless my shoelaces!" cried Mr. Damon. "I can see where I am going to
be cut out, Tom Swift. I'll not get many more rides with you now that
Miss Nestor is taking to aeroplaning, you young rascal!" And he
playfully shook his finger at Tom.

"Oh, I don't expect to get enthusiastic over it," said Miss Nestor,
who, now that she had taken her place in one of the small seats under
the engine, appeared as if she would be glad of the chance to change
her mind. But she did not.

"Now, if you take me more than five feet up in the air, I'll never
speak to you again, Tom Swift!" she exclaimed.

"Five feet it shall be, unless you yourself ask to go higher," was the
youth's reply, as he winked at Mr. Damon. Well he knew the fascination
of aeroplaning, and he was almost sure of what would happen. "You can
take a tape measure along, and see for yourself," he added to his fair
passenger. "The barograph will hardly register such a little height."

"Well, it's as high as I want to go," said the girl. "Oh!" with a
scream, as Tom started the propeller. "Are we going?"

"In a moment," was his reply. He took his seat beside the girl. The
motor was speeded up until it sounded like the roar of the ocean surf
in a storm.

"Let her go!" cried Tom to Mr. Damon and Mr. Jackson, who were holding
back the Humming-Bird. They gave her a slight shove to over-come the
inertia, and the trim little craft darted across the ground at every
increasing speed.

Miss Nestor caught her breath with a gasp, glanced at Tom, and noted
how cool he was, and then her frantic grip of the uprights slightly
relaxed.

"We'll go up a little way in a minute!" shouted Tom in her ear as they
were speeding over the level ground.

He pulled a lever slightly, and the Humming-Bird rose a little in the
air, but only for a short distance, not more than five feet, and Tom
held her there, though he had to run the engine at a greater speed than
would have been the case had he been in the sustaining upper currents.
It was as if the Humming-Bird resented being held so closely to the
earth.

Around in a big circle, back and forth went the craft, at no time being
more than seven feet from the ground. Tom glanced at Miss Nestor. Her
cheeks were unusually red, and there was a bright sparkle in her eyes.

"It's glorious!" she cried. "Do you--do you think there's any danger in
going higher? I believe I'd like to go up a bit."

"I knew it!" cried Tom. "Up we go!" And he pulled the wind-bending
plane lever toward him. Upward shot the craft, as if alive.

"Oh!" gasped Mary.

"Sit still! It's all right!" commanded Tom.

"It's glorious; glorious!" she cried. "I'm not a bit afraid now!"

"I knew you wouldn't be," declared the young inventor, who had
calculated on the fascination which the motion through the air,
untrammeled and free, always produces. "Shall we go higher?"

"Yes!" cried Miss Nestor, and she gazed fearlessly down at the earth,
which was falling away from beneath their feet. She was in the grip of
the air, and it was a new and wonderful sensation.

Tom went up to a considerable distance, for, once a person loses his
first fright, one hundred feet or one thousand feet elevation makes
little difference to him. It was this way with Miss Nestor.

Now, indeed, could Tom demonstrate to her some of the fine points of
navigation in the upper currents, and though he did no risky "stunts,"
he showed the girl what it means to do an ascending spiral, how to cut
corners, how to twist around in the figure eight, and do other things.
Tom did not try for the great speed of which he knew his craft was
capable, for he knew there was some risk with Miss Nestor aboard. But
he did nearly everything else, and when he sent the Humming-Bird down
he had made another convert and devotee to the royal sport of
aeroplaning.

"Oh! I never would have dared believe I could do it!" exclaimed the girl,
as with flushed cheeks and dancing eyes she dismounted from the seat.
"Mamma and papa will never believe I did it!"

"Bring them over, and I'll take them for a flight," said Tom, with a
laugh, as Mary departed.

Tom received an answer to his letter to Mr. Sharp that night.

"Andy Foger's entry blank states," wrote the balloonist, "that he is
constructing his aeroplane in the village of Hampton, which is about
fifty miles from your place. If there is anything further I can do for
you, Tom, let me know. I will see you at the meet. Hope you win the
prize."

"In Hampton, eh?" mused Tom. "So that's where Andy has been keeping
himself all this while. His uncle lives there, and that's the reason
for it. He wanted to keep it a secret from me, so he could use my
stolen plans for his craft. But he shan't do it! I'll go to Hampton!"

"And I'll go with you!" declared Mr. Damon, who was with Tom when he
got the note from the balloonist. "We'll get to the bottom of this
mystery after a while, Tom."

Delaying a few days, to make the final changes in his aeroplane, Tom
and Mr. Damon departed for Hampton one morning. They thought first of
going in the Butterfly, but as they wanted to keep their mission as
secret as possible, they decided to go by train, and arrive in the town
quietly and unostentatiously. They got to Hampton late that afternoon.

"What's the first thing to be done?" asked Mr. Damon as they walked up
from the station, where they were almost the only persons who alighted
from the train.

"Go to the hotel," decided Tom. "There's only one, I was told, so
there's not much choice."

Hampton was a quiet little country town of about five thousand
inhabitants, and Tom soon learned the address of Mr. Bentley, Andy's
uncle, from the hotel clerk.

"What business is Mr. Bentley in?" asked Tom, for he wanted to learn
all he could without inquiring of persons who might question his
motives.

"Oh, he's retired," said the clerk. "He lives on the interest of his
money. But of late he's been erecting some sort of a building on his
back lot, like a big shed, and folks are sort of wondering what he's
doing in it. Keeps mighty secret about it. He's got a young fellow
helping him."

"Has he got red hair?" asked Tom, while his heart beat strangely fast.

"Who? Mr. Bentley? No. His hair's black."

"I mean the young fellow."

"Oh! his? Yes, his is red. He's a nephew, or some relation to Mr.
Bentley. I did hear his name, but I've forgotten it. Sandy, or Andy, or
some such name as that."

This was near enough for Tom and Mr. Damon, and they did not want to
risk asking any more questions. They turned away to go to their rooms,
as the clerk was busy answering inquiries from some other guests. A
little later, supper was served, and Tom, having finished, whispered to
Mr. Damon to join him upstairs as soon as he was through.

"What are you going to do?" asked the eccentric man.

"We're going out and have a look at this new shed by moonlight,"
decided Tom. "I want to see what it's like, and, if possible, I want to
get a peep inside. I'll soon be able to tell whether or not Andy is
using my stolen plans."

"All right. I'm with you. Bless my bill of fare! But we seem to be
doing a lot of mysterious work of late."

"Yes," agreed Tom. "But if you have to bless anything to-night, Mr.
Damon, please whisper it. Andy, or some of his friends, may be about
the shed, and as soon as they hear one of your blessings they'll know
who's coming."

"Oh, I'll be careful," promised Mr. Damon.

"Andy will find out, sooner or later, that we are in town," went on
Tom, "but we may be able to learn to-night what we want to know, and
then we can tell how to act."

A little later, as if they were merely strolling about, Mr. Damon and
Tom headed for Mr. Bentley's place, which was on the outskirts of the
town. There was a full moon, and the night was just right for the kind
of observation Tom wanted to make. There were few persons abroad, and
the young inventor thought he would have no one spying on him.

They located the big house of Andy's uncle without trouble. Going down
a side street, they had a glimpse of a shed, built of new boards,
standing in the middle of a large lot. About the structure was a new,
high wooden fence, but as Tom and his friend passed along it they saw
that a gate in it was open.

"I'm going in!" whispered Tom.

"Will it be safe?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I don't care whether it will be or not. I've got to know what Andy is
doing. Come on! We'll take a chance!"

Cautiously they entered the enclosure. The big shed was dark, and stood
out conspicuously in the moonlight.

"There doesn't seem to be any one here," whispered Tom. "I wonder if we
could get a look in the window?"

"It's worth trying, anyhow," agreed Mr. Damon. "I'm with you, Tom."

They drew nearer to the shed. Suddenly Tom stepped on a stick, which
broke with a sharp report.

"Bless my spectacles!" cried Mr. Damon, half aloud.

There was silence for a moment, and then a voice cried out:

"Who's there? Hold on! Don't come any farther! It's dangerous!"

Tom and Mr. Damon stood still, and from behind the shed stepped Andy
Foger and a man.

"Oh! it's you, is it, Tom Swift?" exclaimed the red-haired bully. "I
thought you'd come sneaking around. Come on, Jake! We'll make them wish
they'd stayed home!" And Andy made a rush for Tom.




Chapter Fourteen

The Great Test


"Bless my gizzard!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, who hardly knew what to do.
"We'd better be getting out of here, Tom!"

"Not much!" exclaimed the young inventor. "I never ran from Andy Foger
yet, and I'm not going to begin now."

He assumed an attitude of defense, and stood calmly awaiting the
onslaught of the bully; but Andy knew better than to come to a personal
argument with Tom, and so the red-haired lad halted some paces off. The
man, who had followed young Foger, also stopped.

"What do you want around here, Tom Swift?" demanded Andy.

"You know very well what I want," said the young inventor, calmly. "I
want to know what you did with the aeroplane plans you took from my
house."

"I never took any!" declared Andy vigorously.

"Well, there's no use discussing that," went on Tom. "What I came here
to find out, and I don't mind telling you, is whether or not you are
building a monoplane to compete against me, and building it on a model
invented by me; and what's more, Andy Foger, I intend to find this out,
too!"

Tom started toward the big shed, which loomed up in the moonlight.

"Stand back!" cried Andy, getting in Tom's way. "I can build any kind
of an aeroplane I like, and you can't stop me!"

"We'll see about that," declared the young inventor, as he kept on.
"I'm not going to allow my plans to be stolen, and a monoplane made
after them, and do nothing about it."

"You keep away!" snarled Andy, and he grabbed Tom by the shoulder and
struck him a blow in the chest. He must have been very much excited, or
otherwise he never would have come to hostilities this way with Tom,
whom he well knew could easily beat him.

The blow, together with the many things he had suffered at Andy's
hands, was too much for our hero. He drew back his fist, and a moment
later Andy Foger was stretched out on the grass. He lay there for a
moment, and then rose up slowly to his knees, his face distorted with
rage.

"You--you hit me!" he snarled.

"Not until you hit first," said Tom calmly.

"Bless my punching bag! That's so!" exclaimed Mr. Damon.

"You'll suffer for this!" whined Andy, getting to his feet, but taking
care to retreat from Tom, who stood ready for him. "I'll get square
with you for this! Jake, come on, and we'll get our guns!"

Andy turned and hurried back toward the shed, followed by the
evil-looking man, who had apparently been undecided whether to attack
Mr. Damon or Tom. Now the bully and his companion were in full retreat.

"We'll get our guns, and then we'll see whether they'll want to stay
where they're not wanted!" went on Andy, threateningly.

"Bless my powderhorn! What had we better do?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I guess we'd better go back," said Tom calmly. "Not that I'm afraid of
Andy. His talk about guns is all bluff; but I don't want to get into
any more of a row, and he is just ugly and reckless enough to make
trouble.  I'm afraid we can't learn what we came to find out, though
I'm more convinced than ever that Andy is using my plans to make his
aeroplane."

"But what can you do?"

"I'll see Mr. Sharp, and send a protest to the aviation committee. I'll
refuse to enter if Andy flies in a model of my Humming-Bird, and I'll
try to prevent him from using it after he gets it on the ground. That
is all I can do, it seems, lacking positive information. Come on, Mr.
Damon. Let's get back to our hotel, and we'll start for home in the
morning."

"I have a plan," whispered the odd man.

"What is it?" asked Tom, narrowly watching for the reappearance of Andy
and the man.

"I'll stay here until they come, then I'll pretend to run away. They'll
chase after me, and get all excited, and you can go up and look in the
shed windows. Then you can join me later. How's that?"

"Too risky. They might fire at you by mistake. No. We'll both go. I've
found out more than enough to confirm my suspicions."

They turned out of the lot which contained the shed, and walked toward
the road, just as Andy and his crony came back.

"Huh! You'd better go!" taunted the bully.

Tom had a bitter feeling in his heart. It seemed as if he was defeated,
and he did not like to retreat before Andy.

"You'd better not come back here again, either," went on Andy.

Tom and Mr. Damon did not reply, but kept on in silence. They returned
to Shopton the next day.

"Well," remarked Tom, when he had gone out to look at his Humming-Bird,
"I know one thing. Andy Foger may build a machine something like this,
but I don't believe he can put in all the improvements I have, and
certainly he can't equal that engine; eh, dad?"

"I hope not, Tom," replied his father, who seemed to be much improved
in health.

"When are you going to try for speed?" asked Mr. Damon.

"To-morrow, if I can get it tuned up enough," replied Tom, "and I think
I can. Yes, we'll have the great test to-morrow, and then I'll know
whether I really have a chance for that ten thousand dollars."

Never before had Tom been so exacting in his requirements of his air
craft as when, the next day, the Humming-Bird was wheeled out to the
flight ground, and gotten ready for the test. The young inventor went
over every bolt, brace, stay, guy wire and upright. He examined every
square inch of the wings, the tips, planes and rudders. The levers, the
steering wheel, the automatic equilibrium attachments and the balancing
weights were looked at again and again.

As for the engine, had it been a delicate watch, Tom could not have
scrutinized each valve, wheel, cam and spur gear more carefully. Then
the gasoline tank was filled, the magneto was looked after, the oil
reservoirs were cleaned out and freshly filled, and finally the lad
remarked:

"Well, I guess I'm ready. Come along, Mr. Damon."

"Am I going with you in the test?"

"Surely. I've been counting on you. If you're to be with me in the
race, you want to get a sample of what we can do. Take your place. Mr.
Jackson, are you ready to time us?"

"All ready, Tom."

"And, dad, do you feel well enough to check back Mr. Jackson's results?
I don't want any errors."

"Oh, yes, Tom. I can do it."

"Very well, then. Now this is my plan. I'm going to mount upward on an
easy slant, and put her through a few stunts first, to warm up, and see
that everything is all right. Then, when I give the signal, by dropping
this small white ball, that means I'm ready for you to start to time
me.  Then I'll begin to try for the record. I'll go about the course in
a big ellipse, and--well, we'll see what happens."

While Mr. Damon was in his seat the young inventor started the
propeller, and noted the thrust developed. It was satisfactory, as
measured on the scale, and then Tom took his place.

"Let her go!" he cried to Mr. Jackson and Eradicate, after he had
listened to the song of the motor for a moment. The Humming-Bird flew
across the course, and a moment later mounted into the air.

Tom quickly took her up to about two thousand feet, and there, finding
the conditions to his liking, he began a few evolutions designed to
severely test the craft's stability, and to learn whether the engine
was working properly.

"How about it?" asked Mr. Damon anxiously.

"All right!" shouted Tom in his ear, for the motor was making a great
racket. "I guess we'll make the trial next time we come around. Get
ready to drop the signal ball."

Tom slowly brought the aeroplane around in a graceful curve. He sighted
down, and saw the first tall white pole that marked the beginning of
the course.

"Drop!" he called to Mr. Damon.

The white rubber ball went to the earth like a shot. Mr. Jackson and
Mr. Swift saw it, and started their timing-watches. Tom opened the
throttle and advanced the spark. The great test was on!

The Humming-Bird trembled and throbbed with the awful speed of the
motor, like a thing alive. She seemed to rush forward as an eagle
dropping down from a dizzy height upon some hapless prey.

"Faster yet!" murmured Tom. "We must go faster yet!"

The motor was warming up. Streaks of fire came from it. The exhaust of
the explosions was a continuous roar. Faster and faster flew the frail
craft.

Around and around the air course she circled. The wind appeared to be
rushing beneath the planes and rudders with the velocity of a
hurricane.  Had it not been for the face protectors they wore, Tom and
Mr. Damon could not have breathed. For ten minutes this fearful speed
was kept up.  Then Tom, knowing he had run the motor to the limit,
slowed it down.  Next he shut it off completely, and prepared to
volplane back to earth.  The silence after the terrific racket was
almost startling. For a moment neither of the aviators spoke. Then Mr.
Damon said:

"Do you think you did it, Tom?"

"I don't know. We'll soon find out. They'll have the record." And he
motioned toward the earth, which they were rapidly nearing.




Chapter Fifteen

A Noise in the Night


"Well, did I make it? Make any kind of a record?" asked Tom eagerly, as
he brought the trim little craft to a stop, after it had rolled along
the ground on the bicycle wheels.

"What do you think you did?" asked Mr. Jackson, who had been busy
figuring on a slip of paper.

"Did I get her up to ninety miles an hour?" inquired Tom eagerly. "If I
did, I know when the motor wears down a bit smoother that I can make
her hit a hundred in the race, easily. Did I touch ninety, Mr. Jackson?"

"Better than that, Tom! Better than that!" cried his father.

"Yes," joined in Mr. Jackson. "Allowing for the difference in our
watches, Tom, your father and I figure that you did the course at the
rate of one hundred and twelve miles an hour!"

"One hundred and twelve!" gasped the young inventor, hardly able to
believe it.

"I made it a hundred and fifteen," said Mr. Swift, who was almost as
pleased as was his son, "and Mr. Jackson made it one hundred and
eleven; so we split the difference, so to speak. You certainly have a
sky racer, Tom, my boy!"

"And I'll need it, too, dad, if I'm to compete with Andy Foger, who may
have a machine almost like mine."

"But I thought you were going to object to him if he has," said Mr.
Damon, who had hardly recovered from the speedy flight through space.

"Well, I was just providing for a contingency, in case my protest was
overruled," remarked Tom. "But I'm glad the Humming-Bird did so well on
her first trial. I know she'll do better the more I run her. Now we'll
get her back in her 'nest,' and I'll look her over, when she cools
down, and see if anything has worked loose."

But the trim little craft needed only slight adjustments after her
tryout, for Tom had built her to stand up under a terrific strain.

"We'll soon be in shape for the big race," he announced, "and when I
bring home that ten thousand dollars I'm going to abandon this
sky-scraping business, except for occasional trips."

"What will you do to occupy your mind?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Oh, I'm going to travel," announced Tom. "Then there's my new electric
rifle, which I have not perfected yet. I'll work on that after I win
the big race."

For several days after the first real trial of his sky racer Tom was
busy going over the Humming-Bird, making slight changes here and there.
He was the sort of a lad who was satisfied with nothing short of the
best, and though neither his father nor Mr. Jackson could see where
there was room for improvement, Tom was so exacting that he sat up for
several nights to perfect such little details as a better grip for the
steering-lever, a quicker way of making the automatic equilibriumizer
take its position, or an improved transmitter for the wireless
apparatus.

That was a part of his monoplane of which Tom was justly proud, for
though many aeroplanes to-day are equipped with the sending device, few
can receive wireless messages in mid-air. But Tom had seen the
advantage of this while making a trip in the ill-fated Red Cloud to the
cave of the diamond makers, and he determined to have his new craft
thus provided against emergencies. The wireless outfit of the
Humming-Bird was a marvel of compactness.

Thus the days passed, with Tom very busy; so busy, in fact, that he
hardly had time to call on Miss Nestor. As for Andy Foger, he heard no
more from him, and the bully was not seen around Shopton. Tom concluded
that he was at his uncle's place, working on his racing craft.

The young inventor sent a formal protest to the aviation committee, to
be used in the event of Andy entering a craft which infringed on the
Humming-Bird, and received word from Mr. Sharp that the interests of
the young inventor would be protected. This satisfied Tom.

Still, at times, he could not help wondering how the first plans had so
mysteriously disappeared, and he would have given a good deal to know
just how Andy got possession of them, and how he knew enough to use
them.

"He, or some one whom he hired, must have gotten into our house mighty
quickly that day," mused Tom, "and then skipped out while dad fell into
a little doze. It was a mighty queer thing, but it's lucky it was no
worse."

The time was approaching for the big aviation meet. Tom's craft was in
readiness, and had been given several other trials, developing more
speed each time. Additional locks were put on the doors of the shed,
and more burglar-alarm wires were strung, so that it was almost a
physical impossibility to get into the Humming-Bird's "nest" without
arousing some one in the Swift household.

"And if they do, I guess we'll be ready for them," said Tom grimly. He
had been unable to find out who it was that had attempted once before
to damage the monoplane, but he suspected it was the ill-favored man
who was working with Andy.

As for Mr. Swift, at times he seemed quite well, and again he required
the services of a physician.

"You will have to be very careful of your father, Tom," said Dr.
Gladby.  "Any sudden shock or excitement may aggravate his malady, and
in that case a serious operation will be necessary."

"Oh, we'll take good care of him," said the lad; but he could not help
worrying, though he tried not to let his father see the strain which he
was under.

It was some days after this, and lacking about a week until the meet
was to open, when a peculiar thing happened. Tom had given his
Humming-Bird a tryout one day, and had then begun to make arrangements
for taking it apart and shipping it to Eagle Park. For he would not fly
to the meet in it, for fear of some accident. So big cases had been
provided.

"I'll take it apart in the morning," decided Tom, as he went to his
room, after seeing to the burglar alarm, "and ship her off. Then Mr.
Damon and I will go there, set her up, and get ready to win the race."

Tom had opened all the windows in his room, for it was very warm. In
fact it was so warm that sleep was almost out of the question, and he
got up to sit near the windows in the hope of feeling a breeze.

There it was more comfortable, and he was just dozing off, and
beginning to think of getting back into bed, when he was aware of a
peculiar sound in the air overhead.

"I wonder if that's a heavy wind starting up?" he mused. "Good luck, if
it is! We need it." The noise increased, sounding more and more like
wind, but Tom, looking out into the night, saw the leaves of the trees
barely moving.

"If that's a breeze, it's taking its own time getting here," he went on.

The sound came nearer, and then Tom knew that it was not the noise of
the wind in the trees. It was more like a roaring and rumbling.

"Can it be distant thunder?" Tom asked himself. "There is no sign of a
storm." Once more he looked from the window. The night was calm and
clear--the trees as still as if they were painted.

The sound was even more plain now, and Tom, who had sharp ears, at once
decided that it was just over the house--directly overhead. An instant
later he knew what it was.

"The motor of an aeroplane, or a dirigible balloon!" he exclaimed.
"Some one is flying overhead!"

For an instant he feared lest the shed had been broken into, and his
Humming-Bird taken, but a glance toward the place seemed to show that
it was all right.

Then Tom hastily made his way to where a flight of stairs led to a
little enclosed observatory on the roof.

"I'm going to see what sort of a craft it is making that noise," he
said.

As he opened the trap door, and stepped out into the little observatory
the sound was so plain as to startle him. He looked up quickly, and,
directly overhead he saw a curious sight.

For, flying so low as to almost brush the lightning rod on the chimney
of the Swift home, was a small aeroplane, and, as Tom looked up, he saw
in a light that gleamed from it, two figures looking down on him.




Chapter Sixteen

A Mysterious Fire


For a few moments Tom did not know what to think. Not that the sight of
aeroplanes in flight were any novelty to him, but to see one flying
over his house in the dead of night was a little out of the ordinary.
Then, as he realized that night-flights were becoming more common, Tom
tried to make out the details of the craft.

"I wish I had brought the night glasses with me," he said aloud.

"Here they are," spoke a voice at his side, and so suddenly that Tom
was startled. He looked down, and saw Mr. Jackson standing beside him.

"Did you hear the noise, too?" the lad asked the engineer.

"Yes. It woke me up. Then I heard you moving around, and I heard you
come up here. I thought maybe it was a flight of meteors you'd come to
see, and I knew the glasses would be handy, so I stopped for them. Take
a look, Tom. It's an aeroplane; isn't it?"

"Yes, and not moving very fast, either. They seem to be circling around
here."

The young inventor was peering through the binoculars, and, as soon as
he had the mysterious craft in focus, he cried:

"Look, Mr. Jackson, it's a new kind of monoplane. I never saw one like
it before. I wonder who could have invented that? It's something like a
Santos-Dumont and a Bleriot, with some features of Cornu's Helicopter.
That's a queer machine."

"It certainly is," agreed the engineer, who was now sighting through
the glasses. In spite of the darkness the binoculars brought out the
peculiarities of the aeroplane with considerable distinctness.

"Can you make out who are in it?" asked Tom.

"No," answered Mr. Jackson. "You try."

But Tom had no better luck. There were two persons in the odd machine,
which was slowly flying along, moving in a great circle, with the Swift
house for its center.

"I wonder why they're hanging around here?" asked Tom, suspiciously.

"Perhaps they want to talk to you," suggested Mr. Jackson. "They may be
fellow inventors--perhaps one of them is that Philadelphia man who had
the Whizzer."

"No," replied the lad. "He would have sent me word if he intended
calling on me. Those are strangers, I think. There they are, coming
back again."

The mysterious aeroplane was once more circling toward the watchers on
the roof. There was a movement on the steps, near which Tom was
standing, and his father came up.

"Is anything the matter?" he asked anxiously.

"Only a queer craft circling around up here," was the reply. "Come and
see, dad."

Mr. Swift ascended to the roof. The aeroplane was higher now, and those
in her could not so easily be made out. Tom felt a vague sense of fear,
as though he was being watched by the evil eyes of his enemies. More
than once he looked over to the shed where his craft was housed, as
though some danger might threaten it. But the shed of the Humming-Bird
showed no signs of invaders.

Suddenly the mysterious aeroplane increased its speed. It circled about
more quickly, and shot upward, as though to show the watchers of what
it was capable. Then, with a quick swoop it darted downward, straight
for the building where Tom's newest invention was housed.

"Look out! They'll hit something!" cried the young inventor, as though
those in the aeroplane could hear him.

Then, just as though they had heeded his warning, the pilots of the
mysterious craft shot her upward, after she had hovered for an instant
over the big shed.

"That was a queer move," said Tom. "It looked as if they lost control
of her for a moment."

"And they dropped something!" cried Mr. Jackson. "Look! something fell
from the aeroplane on the roof of the shed."

"Some tool, likely," spoke Tom. "I'll get it in the morning, and see
what sort of instruments they carry. I'd like to examine that machine,
though."

The queer aeroplane was now shooting off in the darkness and Tom
followed it with the glasses, wondering what its construction could be
like. He was to have another sight of it sooner than he expected.

"Well, we may as well get back to bed," said Mr. Jackson. "I'm tired,
and we've got lots to do to-morrow."

"Yes," agreed Tom. "It's cooler now. Come on, dad."

Tom fell into a light doze. He thought afterward he could not have
slept more than half an hour when he heard a commotion out in the yard.
For an instant he could not tell what it was, and then, as he grew
wider awake he knew that it was the shouting of Eradicate Sampson, and
the braying of Boomerang.

But what was Eradicate shouting?

"Fire! Fire! Fire!"

Tom leaped to his window.

"Wake up, Massa Tom! Wake up! De areoplane shed am on fire, an' de
Humming-Bird will burn up! Hurry! Hurry!"

Tom looked out. Flames were shooting up from the roof of the shed where
his precious craft was kept.




Chapter Seventeen

Mr. Swift is Worse


Almost before the echoes of Eradicate's direful warning cry had died
away, Tom was on his way out of the house, pausing only long enough to
slip on a pair of shoes and his trousers. There was but one thought in
his mind. If he could get the Humming-Bird safely out he would not care
if the shed did burn, even though it contained many valuable tools and
appliances.

"We must save my new aeroplane!" thought Tom, desperately. "I've got to
save her!"

As he raced through the hall he caught up a portable chemical
fire-extinguisher. Tom saw his father's door open, and Mr. Swift looked
out.

"What is it?" he called anxiously.

"Fire!" answered the young inventor, almost before he thought of the
doctor's warning that Mr. Swift must not be excited. Tom wished he
could recall the word, but it was too late. Besides Eradicate, down in
the yard was shouting at the top of his voice:

"Fire! Fire! Fire!"

"Where, Tom?" gasped Mr. Swift, and his son thought the aged inventor
grew suddenly paler.

"Aeroplane shed," answered the lad. "But don't worry dad. It's only a
small blaze. We'll get it out. You stay here. We'll attend to it--Mr.
Jackson and Eradicate and I."

"No--I'm going to help!" exclaimed Mr. Swift, sturdily. "I'll be with
you, Tom. Go on!"

The lad rushed down to the yard, closely followed by the engineer, who
had caught up another extinguisher. Eradicate was rushing about, not
knowing what to do, but still keeping up his shouting.

"It's on de roof! De roof am all blazin'!" he yelled.

"Quit your noise, and get to work!" cried Tom. "Get out a ladder, Rad,
and raise it to the side of the shed. Then play this extinguisher on
the blaze. Mr. Jackson, you help me run the Humming-Bird out. After
she's safe we'll tackle the fire."

Tom cast a hurried look at the burning shed. The flames were shooting
high up from the roof, now, and eating their way down. As he rushed
toward the big doors, which he intended to open to enable him to run
out his sky racer, he was wondering how the fire came to start so high
up as the roof. He wondered if a meteor could have fallen and caused it.

As the doors, which were quickly unlocked by Tom, swung back, and as he
and the engineer started to go in, they were met by choking fumes as if
of some gas. They recoiled for the moment.

"What--what's that?" gasped Tom, coughing and sneezing.

"Some chemical--I--I don't know what kind," spluttered Mr. Jackson.
"Have you any carboys of acid in there Tom, that might have exploded by
the heat?"

"No; not a thing. Let's try again."

Once more they tried to go in, but were again driven back by the
distressing fumes. The fire was eating down, now. There was a hole
burned in the roof, and by the leaping tongues of flame Tom could see
his aeroplane. It was almost in the path of the blaze.

"We must get her out!" he shouted. "I'm going in!"

But it was impossible, and the daring young inventor nearly succumbed
to the choking odors. Mr. Jackson dragged him back.

"We can't go in!" he cried. "There has been some mysterious work here!
Those fumes were put here to keep us from saving the machine. This fire
has been set by some enemy! We can't go in!"

"But I am going!" declared Tom. "We'll try the back door."

They rushed to that, but again were driven out by the gases and vapors,
which were mingled with the smoke. Disheartened, yet with a wild desire
to do something to save his precious craft, Tom Swift drew back for a
moment.

As he did so he heard a hiss, as Eradicate turned the chemical stream
on the blaze. Tom looked up. The faithful colored man was on a ladder
near the burning roof, acting well his part as a fireman.

"That's the stuff!" cried Tom. "Come on, Mr. Jackson. Maybe if we use
the chemical extinguishers we can drive out those fumes!"

The engineer understood. He took up the extinguisher he had brought,
and Tom got a second one from a nearby shed. Then Mr. Swift came out
bearing another.

"You shouldn't have come, dad! We can attend to it!" cried Tom, fearing
for the effect of the excitement on his invalid parent.

"Oh, I couldn't stay there and see the shed burn. Are you getting it
under control? Why don't you run out the Humming-Bird?"

Tom did not mention the choking fumes. He passed up a full extinguisher
to Eradicate, who had used all the chemical in his. Then Tom got
another ladder, and soon three streams were being directed on the
flames. They had eaten, a pretty big hole in the roof, but the
chemicals were slowly telling on them.

As soon as he saw that Eradicate and Mr. Jackson could control the
blaze, Tom descended to the ground, and ran once more to the big doors.
He was determined to make another try to wheel out the aeroplane, for
he saw from above that the flames were now on the side wall, and might
reach the craft any minute. And it would not take much to inflict
serious damage on the sky racer.

"I'll get her, fumes or no fumes!" murmured Tom, grimly. And, whether
it was the effect of the chemical streams, or whether the choking odors
were dissipated through the hole in the roof was not manifested, but,
at any rate, Tom found that he could go in, though he coughed and
gasped for breath.

He wheeled the aeroplane outside, for the Humming-Bird was almost as
light as her namesake. A hurried glance by the gleam of the dying fire
assured Tom that his craft was not damaged beyond a slight scorching of
one of the wing tips.

"That was a narrow escape!" he murmured, as he wheeled the sky racer
far away, out of any danger from sparks. Then he went back to help
fight the fire, which was extinguished in about ten minutes more.

"It was a mighty queer blaze," said Mr. Jackson, "starting at the top
that way. I wonder what caused it?"

"We'll investigate in the morning," decided Tom. "Now, dad, you must
get back to your room." He turned to help his father in, but at that
moment Mr. Swift, who was trying to say something, fell over in a dead
faint.

"Quick! Help me carry him into the house!" cried Tom. "Then telephone
for Dr. Gladby, Mr. Jackson."

The physician looked grave when, half an hour later, he examined his
patient.

"Mr. Swift is very much worse," he said in a low voice. "The excitement
of the fire has aggravated his ailment. I would like another doctor to
see him, Tom."

"Another doctor?" Tom's voice showed his alarm.

"Yes, we must have a consultation. I think Dr. Kurtz will be a good one
to call in. I should like his opinion before I decide what course to
take."

"I'll send Eradicate for him at once," said the young inventor, and he
went to give the colored man his instructions, while his heart was
filled with a great fear for his father.




Chapter Eighteen

The Broken Bridge


Dr. Kurtz looked as grave as did Dr. Gladby when he had made an
examination of the patient. Mr. Swift was still in a semi-conscious
condition, hardly breathing as he rested on the bed where they had
placed him after the fire.

"Vell," said the German physician, after a long silence, "vot is your
obinion, my dear Gladby?"

"I think an operation is necessary."

"Yes, dot is so; but you know vot kind of an operation alone vill safe
him; eh, my dear Gladby?"

Dr. Gladby nodded.

"It will be a rare and delicate one," he said. "There is but one
surgeon I know of who can do it."

"You mean Herr Hendrix?" asked Dr. Kurtz.

"Yes, Dr. Edward Hendrix, of Kirkville. If he can be induced to come I
think there is a chance of saving Mr. Swift's life. I'll speak to Tom
about it."

The two physicians, who had been consulting together, summoned the
youth from another room, where, with Mrs. Baggert and Mr. Jackson he
had been anxiously awaiting the verdict.

"What is it?" the young inventor asked Dr. Gladby.

The medical man told him to what conclusion he and his colleague had
arrived, adding:

"We advise that Dr. Hendrix be sent for at once. But I need hardly tell
you, Tom, that he is a noted specialist, and his services are in great
demand. He is hard to get."

"I'll pay him any sum he asks!" burst out the youth. "I'll spend all my
fortune--and I have made considerable money of late--I'll spend every
cent to get my father well! Money need not stand in the way, Dr.
Gladby."

"I knew that, Tom. Still Dr. Hendrix is a very busy man, and it is hard
to induce him to come a long distance. It is over a hundred miles to
Kirkville, and it is an out-of-the-way place. I never could understand
why Dr. Hendrix settled there. But there he is, and if we want him he
will have to come from there. The worst of it is that there are few
trains, and only a single railroad line from there to Shopton."

"Then I'll telegraph," decided Tom. "I'll offer him his own price, and
ask him to rush here as soon as he can."

"You had better let Dr. Kurtz and me attend to that part of it,"
suggested the physician. "Dr. Hendrix would hardly come on the request
of some one whom he did not know. I'll prepare a telegram, briefly
explaining the case. It is the sort of an operation Dr. Hendrix is much
interested in, and I think he will come on that account, if for no
other reason. I'll write out the message, and you can have Eradicate
take it to the telegraph office."

"I'll take it myself!" exclaimed Tom, as he got ready to go out into
the night with the urgent request. "Is there any immediate danger for
my father?" he asked.

"No; not any immediate danger," replied Dr. Gladby. "But the operation
is imperative if he is to live. It is his one and only chance."

Tom thought only of his father as he hurried on through the night. Even
the prospect of the great race, so soon to take place, had no part in
his mind.

"I'll not race until I'm sure dad is going to get better," he decided.
With the message to the noted specialist Tom also sent one to Mr.
Damon, telling him the news, and asking him to come to Shopton. Tom
felt that the presence of the odd gentleman would help him, and Mr.
Damon, who first intended to stay on at the Swift home until he and Tom
departed for Eagle Park, had gone back to his own residence to attend
to some business Tom knew he would come in the morning, and Mr. Damon
did arrive on the first train.

"Bless my soul!" he exclaimed with ready sympathy, as he extended his
hand to Tom. "What's all this?" The young inventor told him, beginning
with the fire that had been the cause of the excitement which produced
the change in Mr. Swift.

"But I have great hopes that the specialist will be able to cure him,"
said Tom, for, with the coming of daylight, his courage had returned to
him. "Dr. Gladby and Dr. Kurtz depend a great deal on Dr. Hendrix," he
said.

"Yes, he certainly is a wonderful man. I have heard a great deal about
him. I have no doubt but what he will cure your father. But about the
fire? How did it start?"

"I don't know, but now that I have a few hours to spare before the
doctor can get here, I'm going to make an examination."

"Bless my penwiper, but I'll help you."

Tom went into the house, to inquire of Mrs. Baggert, for probably the
tenth time that morning, how his father was doing. Mr. Swift was still
in a semi-conscious condition, but he recognized Tom, when the youth
stood at his bedside.

"Don't worry about me, son," said the brave old inventor, as he took
Tom's hand. "I'll be all right. Go ahead and get ready for the race. I
want you to win!"

Tears came into Tom's eyes. Would his father be well enough to allow
him to take part in the big event? He feared not.

By daylight it was seen that quite a hole had been burned in the
aeroplane shed. Tom and Mr. Damon, accompanied by Mr. Jackson, walked
through the place.

"And you say the fire broke out right after you had seen the mysterious
airship hovering over the house?" asked the eccentric man.

"Well, not exactly after," answered Tom, "but within an hour or so. Why
do you ask?"

But Mr. Damon did not answer. Something on the floor of the shed, amid
a pile of blackened and charred pieces of wood, attracted his
attention.  He stooped over and picked it up.

"Is this yours?" he asked Tom.

"No. What is it?"

The object looked like a small iron ball, with a tube about half an
inch in diameter projecting slightly from it. Tom took it.

"Why, it looks like an infernal machine or a dynamite bomb," he said.
"I wonder where it came from? Guess I'd better drop it in a pail of
water.  Maybe Eradicate found it and brought it here. I never saw it
before. Mr. Jackson, please hand me that pail of water. We'll soak this
bomb."

"There is no need," said Mr. Damon, quietly. "It is harmless now. It
has done its work. It was that which set fire to your shed, and which
caused the stifling fumes."

"That?" cried Tom.

"Yes. This ball is hollow, and was filled with a chemical. It was
dropped on the roof, and, after a certain time, the plug in the tube
was eaten through, the chemicals ran out, set the roof ablaze, and,
dripping down inside spread the choking odors that nearly prevented you
from getting out your aeroplane."

"Are you sure of this?" asked the young inventor.

"Positive. I read about these bombs recently. A German invented them to
be used in attacking a besieged city in case of war."

"But how did this one get on my shed roof?" asked Tom.

"It was dropped there by the mysterious airship!" exclaimed the odd
man.  "That was why the aeroplane moved about over your place. Those in
it hoped that the fire would not break out until you were all asleep,
and that the shed and the Humming-Bird would be destroyed before you
came to the rescue. Some of your enemies are still after you, Tom."

"And it was Andy Foger, I'll wager!" he cried. "He was in that
aircraft!  Oh, I'll have a long score to settle with him!"

"Of course you can't be sure it was he," said Mr. Damon, "but I
wouldn't be a bit surprised but what it was. Andy is capable of such a
thing. He wanted to prevent you from taking part in the race."

"Well, he sha'n't!" cried Tom, and then he thought of his invalid
father. They made a further examination of the shed, and discovered
another empty bomb. Then Tom recalled having seen something drop from
the mysterious aeroplane as it passed over the shed.

"It was these bombs," he said. "We certainly had a narrow escape! Oh,
wait until I settle my score with Andy Foger!"

As there would be but little use for the aeroplane shed now, if Tom
sent his craft off to the meet, it was decided to repair it temporarily
only, until he returned.

Accordingly, a big tarpaulin was fastened over the hole in the roof.
Then Tom put a new wing tip on in place of the one that had been
scorched. He looked all over his sky racer, and decided that it was in
fit condition for the coming meet.

"I'll begin to take it apart for shipment, as soon as I hear from the
specialist that dad is well enough for me to go," he said.

It was a few hours after the discovery of the empty bomb that Tom saw
Dr. Gladby coming along. The physician was urging his horse to top
speed. Tom felt a vague fear in his heart.

"I've got a message from Dr. Hendrix, Tom," he said, as he stopped his
carriage, and approached the lad.

"When can he come?" asked the young inventor, eagerly.

"He can't get here, Tom."

"Can't get here! Why not?"

"Because the railroad bridge has collapsed, and there is no way to
come.  He can't make any other connections to get here in time--in time
to do your father any good, Tom. He has just sent me a telegram to that
effect. Dr. Hendrix can't get here, and..." Dr. Gladby paused.

"Do you mean that my father may die if the operation is not performed?"
asked Tom, in a low voice.

"Yes," was the answer.

"But can't Dr. Hendrix drive here in an auto?" asked the lad. "Surely
there must be some way of getting over the river, even if the railroad
bridge is down. Can't he cross in a boat and drive here?"

"He wouldn't be in time, Tom. Don't you understand, Dr. Hendrix must be
here within four hours, if he is to save your father's life. He never
could do it by driving or by coming on some other road, or in an auto.
He can't make the proper connections. There is no way."

"Yes, there is!" cried Tom, suddenly. "I know a way!"

"How?" asked Dr. Gladby, thrilled by Tom's ringing tones. "How can you
do it, Tom?"

"I'll go for Dr. Hendrix in my Humming-Bird."

"Going for him would do no good. He must be brought here."

"And so he shall be!" cried Tom. "I'll bring him here in my sky
racer--if he has the nerve to stand the journey, and I think he has!
I'll bring Dr. Hendrix here!" and Tom hurried away to prepare for the
thrilling trip.




Chapter Nineteen

A Nervy Specialist


There was little time to lose. Every moment of delay meant so much less
chance for the recovery of Mr. Swift. Even now the periods of
consciousness were becoming shorter and farther apart. He seemed to be
sinking.

Tom resolutely refused to think of the possibility of death, as he went
in to bid his parent good-by before starting off on his trip through
the air. Mr. Swift barely knew his son, and, with tears in his eyes,
though he bravely tried to keep them back, the young inventor went out
into the yard.

There stood the Humming-Bird, with Mr. Jackson, Mr. Damon and Eradicate
working over her, to get her in perfect trim for the race before her--a
race with death.

Fortunately there was little to be done to get the speedy craft ready.
Tom had accomplished most of what was necessary, while waiting for word
from Dr. Hendrix. Now about all that needed to be done was to see that
there was plenty of gasoline and oil in the reservoirs.

"I'll give you a note to Dr. Hendrix," said Mr. Gladby, as Tom was
fastening on his faceguard. "I--I trust you won't be disappointed, Tom.
I hope he will consent to return with you."

"He's got to come," said the young inventor, simply, as if that was all
there was to it.

"Do you think you can make the trip in time?" asked Mr. Damon. "It is a
little less than a hundred miles in an airline, but you have to go and
go back. Can the aeroplane do it?"

"I'd be ashamed of her if she couldn't," said Tom, with a grim
tightening of his lips. "She's just got to do it; that's all! But I
know she will," and he patted the big propeller and the motor's shining
cylinders as though the machine was a thing alive, like a horse or a
dog, who could understand him.

He climbed to his seat, the other one holding a bag of sand to maintain
a good balance.

"Start her," ordered Tom, and Mr. Jackson twisted the propeller. The
motor caught at once, and the air throbbed with the noise of the
explosions. Tom listened to the tune of the machinery. It sang true.

"Two thousand pounds thrust!" called the engineer, as he looked at the
scale.

"Let her go!" cried Tom, whose voice was hardly heard above the roar.
The trim little aeroplane scudded over the ground, gathering speed at
every revolution of the wheels. Then with a spring like that of some
great bird launching itself in flight, she left the earth, and took to
the air. Tom was off on his trip.

Those left behind sent up a cautious cheer, for they did not want to
disturb Mr. Swift. They waved their hands to the young inventor, and he
waved his in reply. Then he settled down for one of the swiftest
flights he had ever undertaken.

Tom ascended until he struck a favorable current of air. There was a
little wind blowing in the direction he wished to take, and that aided
him. But even against a powerful head-wind the Humming-Bird could make
progress.

The young inventor saw the ground slipping backward beneath him.
Carefully he watched the various indicators, and listened intently to
the sound of the cylinders' explosions. They came rapidly and
regularly.  The motor was working well.

Tom glanced at the barograph. It registered two thousand feet, and he
decided to keep at about that height, as it gave him a good view, and
he could see to steer, for a route had been hastily mapped out for him
by his friends.

Over cities, towns, villages, scattered farmhouses; across stretches of
forest; over rivers, above big stretches of open country he flew. Often
he could see eager crowds below, gazing up at him. But he paid no heed.
He was looking for a sight of a certain broad river, which was near
Kirkville. Then he knew he would be close to his goal.

He had speeded up the motor to the limit, and there was nothing to do
now, save to manage the planes, wing tips and rudders, and to see that
the gasoline and oil were properly fed to the machine.

Faster and faster went the Humming-Bird, but Tom's thoughts were even
faster. He was thinking of many things--of his father--of what he would
do if Mr. Swift died--of the mysterious airship--of the stolen
plans--of the fire in the shed--of the great race--and of Andy Foger.

He took little note of time, and when, in less than an hour he sighted
the river that told him he was near to Kirkville, he was rather
startled.

"You certainly did come right along, Humming-Bird!" he murmured proudly.

He descended several hundred feet, and, as he passed over the town, the
people of which grew wildly excited, he looked about for the house of
the noted specialist. He knew how to pick it out, for Dr. Gladby had
described it to him, and Tom was glad to see, as he came within view of
the residence, that it was surrounded by a large yard.

"I can land almost at his door," he said, and he did, volplaning to
earth with an ease born of long practice.

To say that Dr. Hendrix was astonished when Tom dropped in on him in
this manner, would not be exactly true. The specialist was not in the
habit of receiving calls from youths in aeroplanes, but the fact was,
that Dr. Hendrix was so absorbed in his work, and thought so constantly
about it, that it took a great deal to startle him out of his usual
calm.

"And so you came for me in your aeroplane?" he asked of Tom, as he
gazed at the trim little craft. It is doubtful if he really saw it,
however, as Dr. Hendrix was just then thinking of an operation he had
performed a few hours before. "I'm sorry you had your trip for
nothing," he went on.  "I'd like very much to come to your father, but
didn't you get my telegram, telling about the broken bridge? There is
no way for me to get to Shopton in time."

"Yes, there is!" cried Tom, eagerly.

"How?"

"The same way I came--in the aeroplane! Dr. Hendrix you must go back
with me! It's the only way to save my father's life. Come with me in
the Humming-Bird. It's perfectly safe. I can make the trip in less than
an hour. I can carry you and your instruments. Will you come? Won't you
come to save my father's life?" Tom was fairly pleading now.

"A trip in an aeroplane," mused Dr. Hendrix "I've never taken such a
thing. I--"

"Don't be afraid, there's really no danger," said Tom.

The physician seemed to reach a sudden conclusion. His eyes brightened.
He walked over and looked at the little Humming-Bird. For the time
being he forgot about his operations.

"I'll go with you!" he suddenly cried. "I'll go with you, Tom Swift! If
you've got the nerve, so have I! and if my science and skill can save
your father's life, he'll live to be an old man! Wait until I get my
bag and I'll be with you!"

Tom's heart gave a bound of hope.




Chapter Twenty

Just in Time


While Dr. Hendrix was in his office, getting ready to make the
thrilling trip through the air with Tom, the young inventor spent a few
minutes going over his monoplane. The wonderful little craft had made
her first big flight in excellent time, though Tom knew she could do
better the farther she was flown. Not a stay had started, not a guy
wire was loose.  The motor had not overheated, and every bearing was as
cool as though it had not taken part in thousands of revolutions.

"Oh, I can depend on you!" murmured Tom, as he looked to see that the
propeller was tight on the shaft. He gave the bearing a slight
adjustment to make sure of it.

He was at this when the specialist reappeared. Dr. Hendrix, after his
first show of excitement, when he had made his decision to accompany
Tom, had resumed his usual calm demeanor. Once again he was the grave
surgeon, with his mind on the case before him.

"Well, is my auto ready?" he asked absentmindedly. Then, as he saw the
little aeroplane, and Tom standing waiting beside it, he added: "Oh, I
forgot for the moment that I was to make a trip through the air,
instead of in my car. Well, Mr. Swift, are we all ready?"

"All ready," replied the young inventor. "We're going to make fast
time, Dr. Hendrix. You'd better put this on," and Tom extended a face
protector.

"What's it for?" The physician looked curiously at it.

"To keep the air from cutting your cheeks and lips. We are going to
travel a hundred miles an hour this trip."

"A hundred miles an hour!" Dr. Hendrix spoke as though he would like to
back out.

"Maybe more, if I can manage it," went on Tom, calmly, as he proceeded
to remove the bag of sand from the place where the surgeon was to sit.
Then he looked to the various equilibrium arrangements and the control
levers. He was so cool about it, taking it all for granted, as if
rising and flying through the air at a speed rivaling that of the
fastest birds, was a matter of no moment, that Dr. Hendrix was
impressed by the calm demeanor of the young inventor.

"Very well," said the surgeon with a shrug of his shoulders, "I guess
I'm game, Tom Swift."

The doctor took the seat Tom pointed out to him, with his bag of
instruments on his knees. He put on the face protector, and had, at the
suggestion of our hero, donned a heavy coat.

"For it's cold in the upper regions," said Tom.

Several servants in the physician's household had gathered to see him
depart in this novel fashion, and the chauffeur of the auto, in which
the specialist usually made his calls, was also there.

"I'll give you a hand," said the chauffeur to the young inventor. "I
was at an aviation meet once, and I know how it's done."

"Good," exclaimed Tom. "Then you can hold the machine, and shove when I
give the word."

Tom started the propeller himself, and quickly jumped into his seat.
The chauffeur held back the Humming-Bird until the young aviator had
speeded up the motor.

"Let go!" cried the youthful inventor, and the man gave the little
craft a shove. Across the rather uneven ground of the doctor's yard it
ran, straight for a big iron barrier.

"Look out! We'll be into the fence!" shouted the surgeon. "We'll be
killed!" He seemed about to leap off.

"Sit still!" cried Tom, and at that instant he tilted the elevation
planes, and the craft shot upward, going over the fence like a circus
horse taking a seven-barred gate.

"Oh!" exclaimed the physician in a curious voice. They were off on
their trip to save the life of Mr. Swift.

What the sensations of the celebrated specialist were, Tom never
learned. If he was afraid, his fright quickly gave place to wonder, and
the wonder soon changed to delight as the machine rose higher and
higher, acquired more speed, and soared in the air over the country
that spread out in all directions from Kirkville.

"Magnificent! Magnificent!" murmured the doctor, and then Tom knew that
the surgeon was in the grip of the air, and was one of the "bird-men."

Every moment the Humming-Bird increased her speed. They passed over the
river near where men were working on the broken bridge. It was now no
barrier to them. Tom, noting the barograph, and seeing that they were
twenty-two hundred feet high, decided to keep at about that distance
from the earth.

"How fast are we going?" cried Dr. Hendrix, into the ear of the young
inventor.

"Just a little short of a hundred an hour!" Tom shouted back. "We'll
hit a hundred and five before long."

His prediction proved true, and when about forty miles from Shopton
that terrific speed had been attained. It seemed as if they were going
to have a trip devoid of incident, and Tom was congratulating himself
on the quick time made, when he ran into a contrary strata of air.
Almost before he knew it the Humming-Bird gave a dangerous and
sickening dive, and tilted at a terrifying angle.

"Are we going to turn turtle?" cried the doctor.

"I--I hope not!" gasped Tom. He could not understand why the
equilibrium weights did not work, but he had no time then to
investigate. Quickly he warped the wing tips and brought the craft up
on an even keel.

He gave a sigh of relief as the aeroplane was once more shooting
forward, and he was not mistaken when he thought he heard Dr. Hendrix
murmur a prayer of thankfulness. Their escape had been a narrow one.
Tom's nerve, and the coolness of the physician, had alone saved them
from a fall to death.

But now, as if ashamed of her prank, the Humming-Bird went along even
better than before. Tom was peering through the slight haze that hung
over the earth, for a sight of Shopton. At length the spires of the
churches came into view.

"There it is," he called, pointing downward. "We'll land in two minutes
more."

"No time to spare," murmured the doctor, who knew the serious nature of
the aged inventor's illness. "How long did it take us?"

"Fifty-one minutes," replied Tom, glancing at a small clock in front of
him. Then he shut off the motor and volplaned to earth, to the no small
astonishment of the surgeon. He made a perfect landing in the yard
before the shed, leaped from his seat, and called:

"Come, Dr. Hendrix!"

The surgeon followed him. Dr. Gladby and Dr. Kurtz came to the door of
the house. On their faces were grave looks. They greeted the celebrated
surgeon eagerly.

"Well?" he asked quickly, and they knew what he meant.

"You are only just in time," said Dr. Gladby, softly, and Tom,
following the doctors into the house, wondered if his trip with the
specialist had been in vain.




Chapter Twenty-One

"Will He Live?"


Soon there were busy scenes in the Swift home, as preparations were
made for a serious operation on the aged inventor. Tom's father had
sunk into deep unconsciousness, and was stretched out on the bed as
though there was no more life in him. In fact, Tom, for the moment,
feared that it was all over. But good old Dr. Kurtz, noting the look on
the lad's face, said:

"Ach, Dom, doan't vorry! Maybe it vill yet all be vell, und der vater
vill hear of der great race. Bluck up your courage, und doan't gif up.
Der greatest surgeon in der vorld is here now, und if anybody gan safe
your vater, Herr Hendriz gan. Dot vos a great drip you made--a great
drip!"

Tom felt a little comforted and, after a sight of his father, and a
silent prayer that God would spare his life for years to come, the
young inventor went out in the yard. He wanted to be busy about
something, for he knew, with the doctors, and a trained nurse who had
been hastily summoned, there was no immediate need for him. He wanted
to get his mind off the operation that would soon take place, and so he
decided to look over his aeroplane.

Mr. Damon came out when Tom was going over the guy wires and braces, to
see how they had stood the strain.

"Well, Tom, my lad," said the eccentric man, sadly, as he grasped our
hero's hand, "it's too bad. But hope for the best. I'm sure your father
will pull through. We will have to begin taking the Humming-Bird apart
soon; won't we, if we're going to ship it to Eagle Park?" He wanted to
take Tom's mind off his troubles.

"I don't know whether we will or not," was the answer, and Tom tried to
speak unbrokenly, but there was a troublesome lump in his throat, and a
mist of tears in his eyes that prevented him from seeing well. The
Humming-Bird, to him, looked as if she was in a fog.

"Nonsense! Of course we will!" cried Mr. Damon. "Why, bless my
wishbone!  Tom, you don't mean to say you're going to let that little
shrimp Andy Foger walk away with that ten-thousand-dollar prize without
giving him a fight for it; are you?"

This was just what Tom needed, and it seemed good to have Mr. Damon
bless something again, even if it was only a wishbone.

"No!" exclaimed Tom, in ringing tones. "Andy Foger isn't going to beat
me, and if I find out he is going to race with a machine made after my
stolen plans, I'll make him wish he'd never taken them."

"But if the machine he had flying over here when he dropped that bomb
on the shed roof, and set fire to it, is the one he's going to race
with, it isn't like yours," suggested Mr. Damon, who was glad he had
turned the conversation into a more cheerful channel.

"That's so," agreed the young inventor. "Well, we'll have to wait and
see." He was busy now, going over every detail of the Humming-Bird. Mr.
Damon helped him, and they discovered the defect in the equilibrium
weights, and remedied it.

"We can't afford to have an accident in the race," said Tom. He glanced
toward the house, and wondered if the operation had begun yet. He could
see the trained nurse hurrying here and there, Mrs. Baggert helping her.

Eradicate Sampson shuffled out from the stable where he kept his mule
Boomerang. On the face of the honest colored man there was a dejected
look.

"Am Massa Swift any better, Massa Tom?" he asked.

"We can't tell yet," was the answer.

"Well, if he doan't git well, den I'm goin' t' sell mah mule," went on
the dirt-chaser, from which line of activity Eradicate had derived his
name.

"Sell Boomerang! Bless my curry comb! what for?" asked Mr. Damon.

"'Case as how he wouldn't neber be any good fo' wuk any mo'," explained
Eradicate. "He's got so attached t' dis place, an' all de folkes on it,
dat he'd feel so sorry ef--ef--well, ef any ob 'em went away, dat I
couldn't git no mo' wuk out ob him, no how. So ef Massa Swift doan't
git well, den I an' Boomerang parts!"

"Well, we hope it won't happen," said Tom, greatly touched by the
simple grief of Eradicate. The young inventor was silent a moment, and
then he softly added: "I--I wonder when--when we'll know?"

"Soon now, I think," answered Mr. Damon, in a low voice.

Silently they waited about the aeroplane. Tom tried to busy himself,
but he could not. He kept his eyes fastened on the house.

It seemed like several hours, but it was not more than one, ere the
white-capped nurse came to the door and waved her hand to Tom. He
sprang to his feet and rushed forward. What would be the message he was
to receive?

He stood before the nurse, his heart madly beating. She looked gently
at him.

"Will he--will he live?" Tom asked, pantingly.

"I think so," she answered gently. "The operation is over. It was a
success, so far. Time alone will tell, now. Dr. Hendrix says you can
see your father for just a moment."




Chapter Twenty-Two

Off to the Meet


Softly Tom tiptoed into the room where his father lay. At the bedside
were the three doctors, and the nurse followed the young inventor in.
Mrs. Baggert stood in the hall, and near her was Garret Jackson. The
aged housekeeper had been weeping, but she smiled at Tom through her
tears.

"I think he's going to get well," she whispered. She always looked on
the bright side of things. Tom's heart felt better.

"You must only speak a few words to him," cautioned the specialist, who
had performed such a rare and delicate operation, near the heart of the
invalid. "He is very weak, Tom."

Mr. Swift opened his eyes as his son approached. He looked around
feebly.

"Tom--are you there?" he asked in a whisper.

"Yes, dad," was the eager answer.

"They tell me you--you made a great trip to get Dr. Hendrix--broken
bridge--came through the air with him. Is that right?"

"Yes, dad. But don't tire yourself. You must get well and strong."

"I will, Tom. But tell me; did you go in--in the Humming-Bird?"

"Yes, dad."

"How did she work?"

"Fine. Over a hundred, and the motor wasn't at its best."

"That's good. Then you can go in the big race, and win."

"No, I don't believe I'll go, dad."

"Why not?" Mr. Swift spoke more strongly.

"I--because--well, I don't want to."

"Nonsense, Tom! I know; it's on my account. I know it is. But listen to
me. I want you to go in! I want you to win that race! Never mind about
me. I'm going to get well, and I'll recover all the more quickly if you
win that race. Now promise me you'll go in it and--and--win!"

The invalid's strength was fast leaving him.

"I--I---," began Tom.

"Promise!" insisted the aged inventor, trying to rise. Dr. Hendrix made
a hasty move toward the bed.

"Promise!" whispered the surgeon to Tom.

"I--I promise!" exclaimed Tom, and the aged inventor sank back with a
smile of satisfaction on his pale face.

"Now you must go," said Dr. Gladby to Tom. "He has talked long enough.
He must sleep now, and get up his strength."

"Will he get better?" asked Tom, anxiously.

"We can't say for sure," was the answer. "We have great hopes."

"I don't want to enter the race unless I know he is going to live,"
went on Tom, as Dr. Gladby followed him out of the room.

"No one can say for a certainty that he will recover," spoke the
physician. "You will have to hope for the best, that is all, Tom. If I
were you I'd go in the race. It will occupy your mind, and if you could
send good news to your father it might help him in the fight for life
he is making."

"But suppose--suppose something happens while I am away?" suggested the
young inventor.

The doctor thought for a moment. Then he exclaimed:

"You have a wireless outfit on your craft; haven't you?"

"Yes."

"Then you can receive messages from here every hour if you wish. Garret
Jackson, your engineer, can send them, and you can pick them up in
mid-air if need be."

"So I can!" cried Tom. "I will go to the meet. I'll take the
Humming-Bird apart at once, and ship it to Eagle Park. Unless Dr.
Hendrix wants to go back in it," he added as an after thought.

"No," spoke Dr. Gladby, "Dr. Hendrix is going to remain here for a few
days, in case of an emergency. By that time the bridge will have been
repaired, and he can go back by train. I gather, from what he said,
that though he liked the air trip, he will not care for another one."

"Very well," assented Tom, and Mr. Damon and he were kept busy, packing
the Humming-Bird for shipment. Mr. Jackson helped them, and Eradicate
and his mule Boomerang were called on occasionally when boxes or crates
were to be taken to the railroad station.

In the meanwhile, Mr. Swift, if he did not improve any, at least held
his own. This the doctors said was a sign of hope, and, though Tom was
filled with anxiety, he tried to think that fate would be kind to him,
and that his father would recover. Dr. Hendrix left, saying there was
nothing more he could do, and that the rest depended on the local
physicians, and on the nurse.

"Und ve vill do our duty!" ponderously exclaimed Dr. Kurtz. "You go off
to dot bird race, Dom, und doan't vorry. Ve vill send der with-out-vire
messages to you venever dere is anyt'ing to report. Go mit a light
heart!"

How Tom wished he could, but it was out of the question. The last of
the parts of the Humming-Bird had been sent away, and our hero
forwarded a telegram to Mr. Sharp, of the arrangement committee,
stating that he and Mr. Damon would soon follow. Then, having bidden
his father a fond farewell, and after arranging with Mr. Jackson to
send frequent wireless messages, Tom and the eccentric man left for the
meet.

There was a wireless station at Eagle Park, and Tom had planned to
receive the messages from home there until he could set up his own
plant. He would have two outfits. One in the big tent where the
Humming-Bird was to be put together, and another on the machine itself,
so that when in the air, practicing, or even in the great race itself,
there would be no break in the news that was to be flashed through
space.

Tom and Mr. Damon arrived at Eagle Park on time, and Tom's first
inquiry was for a message from home. There was one, stating that Mr.
Swift was fairly comfortable, and seemed to be doing well. With
happiness in his heart, the young inventor then set about getting the
parts of his craft from the station to the park, where he and Mr.
Damon, with a trusty machinist whom Mr. Sharp had recommended, would
assemble it. Tom arranged that in his absence the wireless operator on
the grounds would take any message that came for him.

The Humming-Bird, in the big cases and boxes, had safely arrived, and
these were soon in the tent which had been assigned to Tom. It was
still several days until the opening of the meet, and the grounds
presented a scene of confusion.

Workmen were putting up grand stands, tents and sheds were being
erected, exhibitors were getting their machines in shape, and excited
contestants of many nationalities were hurrying to and fro, inquiring
about parts delayed in shipment, or worrying lest some of their pet
ideas be stolen.

Tom and Mr. Damon, with Frank Forker, the young machinist, were soon
busy in their big tent, which was a combined workshop and living
quarters, for Tom had determined to stay right on the ground until the
big race was over.

"I don't see anything of Andy Foger," remarked Mr. Damon, on the second
day of their residence in the park. "There are lots of new entries
arriving, but he doesn't seem to be on hand."

"There's time enough," replied Tom. "I am afraid he's hanging back
until the last minute, and will spring his machine so late that I won't
have time to lodge a protest. It would be just like him."

"Well, I'll be on the lookout for him. Have you heard from home to-day,
Tom?"

"No. I'm expecting a message any minute." The young inventor glanced
toward the wireless apparatus which had been set up in the tent. At
that moment there came the peculiar sound which indicated a message
coming through space, and down the receiving wires. "There's something
now!" exclaimed Tom, as he hurried over and clamped the telephone
receiver to his ear. He listened a moment.

"Good news!" he exclaimed. "Dad sat up a little to-day! I guess he's
going to get well!" and he clicked back congratulations to his father
and the others in Shopton.

Another day saw the Humming-Bird almost in shape again, and Tom was
preparing for a tryout of the engine.

Mr. Damon had gone over to the committee headquarters to consult with
Mr. Sharp about the steps necessary for Tom to take in case Andy did
attempt to enter a craft that infringed on the ideas of the young
inventor, and on his way back he saw a newly-erected tent. There was a
young man standing in the entrance, at the sight of whom the eccentric
man murmured:

"Bless my skate-strap! His face looks very familiar!"

The youth disappeared inside the tent suddenly, and, as Mr. Damon came
opposite the canvas shelter, he started in surprise.

For, on a strip of muslin which was across the tent, painted in gay
colors, were the words:


THE FOGER AEROPLANE


"Bless my elevation rudder!" cried Mr. Damon. "Andy's here at last! I
must tell Tom!"




Chapter Twenty-Three

The Great Race


"Well," remarked Mr. Sharp, when Tom and Mr. Damon had called on him,
to state that Andy Foger's machine was now on the grounds, and
demanding to be allowed to view it, to see if it was an infringement on
the one entered by the young inventor, "I'll do the best I can for you.
I'll lay the case before the committee. It will meet at once, and I'll
let you know what they say."

"Understand," said Tom, "I don't want to interfere unless I am
convinced that Andy is trying an underhand trick. My plans are missing,
and I think he took them. If his machine is made after those plans, it
is, obviously, a steal, and I want him ruled out of the meet."

"And so he shall be!" exclaimed Mr. Sharp. "Get the evidence against
him, and we'll act quickly enough."

The committee met in about an hour, and considered the case. Meanwhile,
Tom and Mr. Damon strolled past the tent with its flaring sign. There
was a man on guard, but Andy was not in sight.

Then Tom was sent for, and Mr. Sharp told him what conclusion had been
arrived at. It was this:

"Under the rules of the meet," said the balloonist, "we had to
guarantee privacy to all the contestants until such time as they choose
to exhibit their machines. That is, they need not bring them out until
just before the races," he added. "This is not a handicap affair, and
the speediest machine, or the one that goes to the greatest height,
according to which class it enters, will win. In consequence we cannot
force any contestant to declare what kind of a machine he will use
until he gets ready.

"Some are going to use the familiar type of biplanes and, as you can
see, there is no secret about them. They are trying them out now." This
was so, for several machines of this type were either in the air,
circling about, or were being run over the ground.

"But others," continued Mr. Sharp, "will not even take the committee
into their confidence until just before the race. They want to keep
their craft a secret. We can't compel them to do otherwise. I'm sorry,
Tom, but the only thing I see for you to do is to wait until the last
minute. Then, if you find Andy has infringed on your machine, lodge a
protest--that is unless you can get evidence against him before that
time."

Tom well knew the uselessness of the latter plan. He and Mr. Damon had
tried several times to get a glimpse of the craft Andy had made, but
without success. As to the other alternative--that of waiting until the
last moment--Tom feared that, too, would be futile.

"For," he reasoned, "just before the race there will be a lot of
confusion, officials will be here and there, scattered over the ground,
they will be hard to find, and it will be almost useless to protest
then. Andy will enter the race, and there is a possibility that he may
win. Almost any one could with a machine like the Humming-Bird. It's
the machine almost as much as the operator, in a case like this."

"But you can protest after the race," suggested Mr. Damon.

"That would be little good, in case Andy beat me. The public would say
I was a sorehead, and jealous. No, I've either got to stop Andy before
the race, or not at all. I will try to think of a plan."

Tom did think of several, but abandoned them one after the other. He
tried to get a glimpse inside the tent where the Foger aeroplane was
housed, but it was too closely guarded. Andy himself was not much in
evidence, and Tom only had fleeting glimpses of the bully.

Meanwhile he and Mr. Damon, together with their machinist, were kept
busy. As Tom's craft was fully protected by patents now, he had no
hesitation in taking it out, and it was given several severe tests
around the aerial course. It did even better than Tom expected of it,
and he had great hopes.

Always, though, there were two things that worried him. One was his
father's illness, and the other the uneasiness he felt as to what Andy
Foger might do. As to the former, the wireless reports indicated that
Mr. Swift was doing as well as could be expected, but his improvement
was not rapid. Regarding the latter worry, Tom saw no way of getting
rid of it.

"I've just got to wait, that's all," he thought.

The day before the opening of the meet, Tom and Mr. Damon had given the
Humming-Bird a grueling tryout. They had taken her high up--so high
that no prying eyes could time them, and there Tom had opened the motor
for all the power in it. They had flashed through space at the rate of
one hundred and twenty miles an hour.

"If we can only do that in the race, the ten thousand dollars is mine!"
exulted Tom, as he slanted the nose of the aeroplane toward the earth.

The day of the race dawned clear and beautiful. Tom was up early, for
there remained many little things to do to get his craft in final trim
for the contest. Then, too, he wanted to be ready to act promptly as
soon as Andy's machine was wheeled out, and he also wanted to get a
message from home.

The wireless arrived soon after breakfast, and did not contain very
cheering news.

"Your father not so well," Mr. Jackson sent. "Poor night, but doctor
thinks day will show improvement. Don't worry."

"Don't worry! I wonder who could help it," mused poor Tom. "Well, I'll
hope for the best," and he wired back to tell the engineer in Shopton
to keep in touch with him, and to flash the messages to the
Humming-Bird in the air, after the big race started.

"Now I'll go out and see if I can catch a glimpse of what that sneak
Andy has to pit against me," said Tom.

The Foger tent was tightly closed, and Tom turned back to his own
place, having arranged with a messenger to come and let him know as
soon as Andy's craft was wheeled out.

All about was a scene of great activity. The grand stands were filled,
and a big crowd stood about the field anxiously waiting for the first
sight of the "bird-men" in their wonderful machines. Now and then the
band blared out, and cheers arose as one after another the frail craft
were wheeled to the starting place.

Men in queer leather costumes darted here and there--they were the
aviators who were soon to risk life and limb for glory and gold. Most
of them were nervously smoking cigarettes. The air was filled with
guttural German or nasal French, while now and then the staccato
Russian was heard, and occasionally the liquid tones of a Japanese. For
men of many nations were competing for the prizes.

The majority of the machines were monoplanes and biplanes though one
triplane was entered, and there were several "freaks" as the biplane
and monoplane men called them--craft of the helicopter, or the wheel
type.  There was also one Witzig Liore Dutilleul biplane, with three
planes behind.

Tom was familiar with most of these types, but occasionally he saw a
new one that excited his curiosity. However, he was more interested in
what Andy Foger would turn out. Andy's machine had not been tried, and
Tom wondered how he dared risk flying in it, without at least a
preliminary tryout. But Andy, and those with him, were evidently full
of confidence.

News of the suspicions of Tom, and what he intended to do in case these
suspicions proved true, had gotten around, and there was quite a crowd
about his own tent, and another throng around that of Andy.

Tom and Mr. Damon had wheeled the Humming-Bird out of her canvas
"nest." There was a cheer as the crowd caught sight of the trim little
craft. The young inventor, the eccentric man, and the machinist were
busy going over every part.

Meanwhile the meet had been officially opened, and it was announced
that the preliminary event would be some air evolutions at no great
height, and for no particular prize. Several biplanes and monoplanes
took part in this. It was very interesting, but the big
ten-thousand-dollar race, over a distance of a hundred miles was the
principal feature of the meet, and all waited anxiously for this.

The opening stunts passed off successfully, save that a German operator
in a Bleriot came to grief, crashing down to the ground, wrecking his
machine, and breaking an arm. But he only laughed at that, and coolly
demanded another cigarette, as he crawled out of the tangle of wires,
planes and the motor.

After this there was an exhibition flight by a French aviator in a
Curtis biplane, who raced against one in a Baby Wright. It was a dead
heat, according to the judges. Then came a flight for height; and while
no records were broken, the crowd was well satisfied.

"Get ready for the hundred-mile ten-thousand-dollar-prize race!"
shouted the announcer, through his megaphone.

Tom's heart gave a bound. There were seven entrants in this contest
besides Tom and Andy Foger, and as announced by the starter they were
as follows:

  CONTESTANT                   MACHINE
  Von Bergen.................Wright Biplane
  Alameda..............Antoinette Monoplane
  Perique.................Bleriot Monoplane
  Loi Tong..........Santos-Dumont Monoplane
  Wendell....................Curtis Biplane
  De Tromp...................Farman Biplane
  Lascalle.............Demoiselle Monoplane
  Andy Foger.................--------------
  Tom Swift..........Humming-Bird Monoplane


"What is the style of the Foger machine?" yelled some one in the crowd,
as the announcer lowered his megaphone.

"It has not been announced," was the reply. "It will at once be wheeled
out though, in accordance with the conditions of the race."

There was a craning of necks, and an uneasy movement in the crowd, for
Tom's story was now generally known.

"Get ready to make your protest," advised Mr. Damon to the young
inventor. "I'll stay by the machine here until you come back. Bless my
radiator! I hope you beat him!"

"I will, if it's possible!" murmured Tom, with a grim tightening of his
lips.

There was a movement about Andy's tent, whence, for the last half hour
had come spasmodic noises that indicated the trying-out of the motor.
The flaps were pulled back and a curious machine was wheeled into view.
Tom rushed over toward it, intent on getting the first view. Would it
prove to be a copy of his speedy Humming-Bird?

Eagerly he looked, but a curious sight met his eyes. The machine was
totally unlike any he had expected to see. It was large, and to his
mind rather clumsy, but it looked powerful. Then, as he took in the
details, he knew that it was the same one that had flown over his house
that night--it was the one from which the fire bomb had been dropped.

He pushed his way through the crowd. He saw Andy standing near the
curious biplane, which type of air craft it nearest resembled, though
it had some monoplane features. On the side was painted the name:

           SLUGGER


Andy caught sight of Tom Swift.

"I'm going to beat you!" the bully boasted, "and I haven't a machine
like yours, after all. You were wrong."

"So I see," stammered Tom, hardly knowing what to think. "What did you
do with my plans then?"

"I never had them!"

Andy turned away, and began to assist the men he had hired to help him.
Like all the others, his machine had two seats, for in this race each
operator must carry a passenger.

Tom turned away, both glad and sorry,--glad that his rival was not to
race him in a duplicate of the Humming-Bird, but sorry that he had as
yet no track of the strangely missing plans.

"I wonder where they can be?" mused the young inventor.

Then came the firing of the preliminary gun. Tom rushed back to where
Mr. Damon stood waiting for him.

There was a last look at the Humming-Bird. She was fit to race any
machine on the ground. Mr. Damon took his place. Tom started the
propeller. The other contestants were in their seats with their
passengers. Their assistants stood ready to shove them off. The
explosions of so many motors in action were deafening.

"How much thrust?" cried Tom to his machinist.

"Twenty-two hundred pounds!"

"Good!"

The report of the starting-gun could not be heard. But the smoke of it
leaped into the air. It was the signal to go.

Tom's voice would not have carried five feet. He waved his hands as a
signal. His helper thrust the Humming-Bird forward. Over the smooth
ground it rushed. Tom looked eagerly ahead. On a line with him were the
other machines, including Andy Foger's Slugger.

Tom pulled a lever. He felt his craft soar upward. The other machines
also pointed their noses into the air.

The big race for the ten-thousand-dollar prize was under way!




Chapter Twenty-Four

Won by a Length


Rising upward, on a steep slant, for he wanted to get into the upper
currents as soon as possible, Tom looked down and off to his left and
saw one machine going over the ground in curious leaps and bounds. It
was the tiny Demoiselle--the smallest craft in the race, and its
peculiar style of starting was always thus manifested.

"I don't believe he's going to make it," thought Tom.

He was right. In another moment the tiny craft, after rising a short
distance, dove downward, and was wrecked. The young inventor saw the
two men crawling out from the tangled planes and wings, apparently
uninjured.

"One contestant less," thought Tom, grimly, though with pity in his
heart for the unfortunates.

However, he must think of himself and his own craft now. He glanced at
Mr. Damon sitting beside him. That odd gentleman, with never a thought
of blessing anything now, unless he did it silently, was watching the
lubricating system. This was a vital part of the craft, for if anything
went wrong with it, and the bearings overheated, the race would have to
be abandoned. So Tom was not trusting to any automatic arrangement, but
had instituted, almost at the last moment, a duplicate hand-worked
system, so that if one failed him he would have the other.

"A good start!" shouted Mr. Damon in his ear.

Tom nodded, and glanced behind him. On a line with the Humming-Bird,
and at about the same elevation, were the Bleriot monoplane and a
Wright biplane. Below were the Santos-Dumont and the Antoinette.

"Where's the Slugger?" called Tom to his friend.

Mr. Damon motioned upward. There, in the air above Tom's machine, and
slightly in advance, was Andy Foger's craft. He had gotten away in
better shape than had the Humming-Bird.

For a moment Tom's heart misgave him. Then he turned on more power, and
had the satisfaction of mounting upward and shooting onward until he
was on even terms with Andy.

The bully gave one glance over toward his rival, and pulled a lever.
The Slugger increased her speed, but Tom was not a second behind him.

There was a roaring noise in the rear, and up shot De Tromp in the
Farman, and Loi Tong, the little Japanese, in the Santos-Dumont. Truly
the race was going to be a hotly contested one. But the end was far off
yet.

After the first jockeying for a start and position, the race settled
down into what might be termed a "grind." The course was a large one,
but so favorable was the atmosphere that day, and such was the location
of Eagle Park in a great valley, that even on the far side of the great
ellipse the contestants could be seen, dimly with the naked eye, but
very plainly with glasses, with which many of the spectators were
provided.

Around and around they went, at no very great height, for it was
necessary to make out the signals set up by the race officials, so that
the contestants would know when they were near the finish, that they
might use the last atom of speed. So at varying heights the wonderful
machines circled about the course.

The Humming-Bird was working well, and Tom felt a sense of pride as he
saw the ground slipping away below him. He felt sure that he would win,
even when Alameda, the Spaniard, in the Antoinette, came creeping up on
him, and even when Andy Foger, with a burst of speed, placed himself
and his passenger in the lead.

"I'll catch him!" muttered Tom, and he opened the throttle a trifle
wider, and went after Andy, passing him with ease.

They had covered about thirty miles of the course, when the humming and
crackling of the wireless apparatus told Tom that a message was coming.
He snapped the receiver to his ear, adjusting the outer covering to
shut out the racket of the motor, and listened.

"Well?" asked Mr. Damon, as Tom took off the receiver.

"Dad isn't quite so well," answered the lad. "Mr. Jackson says they
have sent for Dr. Hendrix again. But dad is game. He sends me word to
go on and win, and I'll do it, too, only--"

Tom paused, and choked back a sob. Then he prepared to get more speed
out of his motor.

"Of course you will!" cried Mr. Damon. "Bless my--!"

But they encountered an adverse current of wind at that moment, and it
required the attention of both of the aviators to manage the machine.
It was soon on an even keel again, and once more was shooting forward
around the course.

At times Tom would be in advance, and again he would have to give place
to the Curtis, the Farman, or the Santos-Dumont, as these speedy
machines, favored by a spurt from their motors, or by some current of
air, shot ahead. But, in general, Tom maintained the lead, and among
the spectators there began a series of guesses as to how much he would
win by.

Tom glanced at the barograph. It registered a little over twelve
hundred feet. He looked at the speed gage. He was doing a trifle better
than a hundred miles an hour. He looked down at the signals. There was
twenty miles yet to go. It was almost time for the spurt for which he
had been holding back. Yet he would wait until five miles from the end,
and then he felt that he could gain and maintain a lead.

"Andy seems to be doing well," said Mr. Damon.

"Yes, he has a good machine," conceded Tom.

Five miles more were reeled off. Then another five. Another round of
that distance and Tom would key his motor up to the highest pitch, and
then the Humming-Bird would show what she could do. Eagerly Tom waited
for the right signal.

Suddenly the wireless began buzzing again. Quickly the young inventor
clamped the receiver to his ear. Mr. Damon saw him turn pale.

"Dr. Gladby says dad has a turn for the worse. There is little hope,"
translated Tom.

"Will you--are you going to quit?" asked Mr. Damon.

Tom shook his head.

"No!" he cried. "My father has become unconscious, so Mr. Jackson says,
but his last words were to me: 'Tell Tom to win the race!' And I'm
going to do it!"

Tom suddenly changed his plans. There was to be no waiting for the
signal now. He would begin his final spurt, and if possible finish the
hundred miles at his utmost speed, win the race and then hasten to his
father's side.

With a menacing roar the motor of the Humming-Bird took up the
additional power that Tom sent into her. She shot ahead like an eagle
darting after his prey. Tom opened up a big gap between his machine and
the one nearest him, which, at that moment, was the Antoinette, with
the Spaniard driving her.

"Now to win!" cried Tom, grimly.

Surely no race was ever flown as was that one! Tom flashed through the
air so quickly that his speed was almost incredible. The gage
registered one hundred and thirty miles an hour!

Down below in the grand stands, and on the aviation field, there were
yells of approval--of wonder--of fear. But Tom and Mr. Damon could not
hear them. They only heard the powerful song of the motor.

Faster and faster flew the Humming-Bird. Tom looked down, and saw the
signal put up which meant that there were but three miles more to go.
He felt that he could do it. He was half a lap ahead of them all now.
But he saw Andy Foger's machine pulling away from the bunch.

"He's going to try to catch me!" exulted Tom.

Then something happened. The motor of the Humming-Bird suddenly
slackened its speed, it missed explosions, and the trim little craft
began to drop behind.

"What's the matter?" cried Mr. Damon.

"Three of the cylinders are out of business!" yelled Tom. "We're done
for, I guess."

On came the other machines, Andy in the lead, then the Santos-Dumont,
then the Farman, and lastly the Wright. They saw the plight of the
Humming-Bird and determined to beat her. Tom cast a despairing look up
at the motor. There was nothing to be done. He could not reach it in
mid-air. He could only keep on, crippled as he was, and trust to luck.

Andy passed by his rival with an evil smile on his ugly face. Then the
Antoinette flashed by. In turn all the others left Tom in the rear. His
heart was like lead. Mr. Damon gazed blankly forward. They were beaten.
It did not seem possible.

There was but a single chance. If Tom shut off all power, coasted for a
moment, and then, ere the propeller had ceased revolving, if he could
start the motor on the spark, the silent cylinders might pick up, with
the others, and begin again. He would try it. They could be no worse
off than they were.

"A mile behind!" gasped Tom. "It's a long chance, but I'll take it."

He shut off the power. The motor was silent, the Humming-Bird began to
fall. But ere she had gone down ten feet Tom suddenly switched on the
batteries. There was a moment of silence, and then came the welcome
roar that told of the rekindled motor. And such a roar as it was! Every
cylinder was exploding as though none of them had ever stopped!

"We did it!" yelled Tom. Opening up at full speed, he sent the sky
racer on the course to overtake and pass his rivals.

Slowly he crept on them. They looked back and saw him coming. They
tried to put on more speed, but it was impossible. Andy Foger was in
the lead.  He was being slowly overhauled by the Santos-Dumont, with
the queer tail-rudders.

"I'll get him!" muttered Tom. "I'll pass 'em all!"

And he did. With a wonderful burst of speed the little Humming-Bird
overtook one after another of her larger rivals, and passed them. Then
she crept up on Andy's Slugger.

In an instant more it was done, and, a good length in advance of the
Foger craft, Tom shot over the finish line a winner, richer by ten
thousand dollars, and, not only that, but he had picked up a mile that
had been lost, and had snatched victory from almost certain defeat.

There was a succession of thundering cheers as he shut off the motor,
and volplaned to earth, but he paid little attention to them. He
brought his craft to a stop just as the wireless on it buzzed again.

He listened with a look of pain on his face.

"My father is dying," he said simply. "I must go to him. Mr. Damon,
will you fill the tanks with oil and gasoline, while I send off a
message?"

"Oil and gasoline," murmured the odd man, while hundreds pressed up to
congratulate Tom Swift "What are you going to do?"

"I'm going to my father in the Humming-Bird," said Tom. "It's the only
way I can see him alive," and he began to click off a message to Mr.
Jackson, stating that he had won the race and was going to fly to
Shopton, while Mr. Damon and several others replenished the fuel and
oil of the aeroplane.

Tom Swift had won one race. Could he win the other?




Chapter Twenty-Five

Home Again--Conclusion


Mr. Sharp pushed his way through the crowd.

"The committee has the certified check ready for you, Tom," called the
balloonist. "Will you come and get it?"

"Send it to me, please," answered the young inventor. "I must go to my
father."

"Huh! I'd have beaten him in another round," boasted Andy Foger. No one
paid any attention to him.

"Monsieur ezz plucky!" said the Frenchman, Perique. "I am honaired to
shake his hand! He has broken all ze records!"

"Dot's der best machine I effer saw," spoke the Dutchman, De Tromp,
ponderously. "Shake hands!"

"Ver' fine, ver' good!" came from the little Japanese, and all the
contestants congratulated Tom warmly. Never before had a hundred miles
been covered so speedily.

A man elbowed his way through the press of people.

"Is your machine fully protected by patents?" he inquired earnestly.

"It is," said Tom.

"Then, as a representative of the United States Government, I would
like an option to purchase the exclusive right to use them," said the
man.  "Can you guarantee that no one else has any plans of them? It
will mean a fortune to you."

Tom hesitated. He thought of the stolen plans. If he could only get
possession of them! He glanced at Andy Foger, who was wheeling his
machine back into the tent. But there was no time now to have it out
with the bully.

"I will see you again," said Tom to the government agent. "I must go to
my father, who is dying. I can't answer you now."

The tanks were filled. Tom gave a hasty look to his machine, and,
bidding his new friends farewell, he and Mr. Damon took their places
aboard the Humming-Bird. The little craft rose in the air, and soon
they had left Eagle Park far behind. Eagerly Tom strained his eyes for
a sight of his home town, though he knew it would be several hours ere
he could hover over it.

Would he be in time? Would he be in time? That question came to him
again and again.

For a time the Humming-Bird skimmed along as though she delighted in
the rapid motion, in slipping through the air and sliding along on the
billows of wind. Tom, with critical ears, listened to the hum of the
motor, the puffing of the exhaust, the grinding of the gear wheels, and
the clicking of the trips, as valve after valve opened or closed to
admit the mixture of air and gasoline, or closed to give the
compression necessary for the proper explosion.

"Is she working all right?" asked Mr. Damon, anxiously, and, such was
the strain on him that he did not think to bless anything. "Is she all
right, Tom, my lad?"

"I think so. I'm speeding her to the limit. Faster than I ever did
before, but I guess she'll do. She was built to stand a strain, and
she's got to do it now!"

Then there was silence again, as they slid along through the air like a
coaster gliding down a steep descent.

"It was a great race, wasn't it?" asked Mr. Damon, as he shifted to an
easier position in his seat. "A great race, Tom. I didn't think you'd
do it, one spell there."

"Neither did I," came the answer, as the young inventor changed the
spark lever. "But I made up my mind I wouldn't be beaten by Andy Foger,
if I could help it. Though it was taking a risk to shut off the current
the way I did."

"A risk?"

"Yes; it might not have started again," and Tom looked down at the
earth below them, as if measuring the distance he would have fallen had
not his sky racer kept on at the critical moment.

"And--and if the current hadn't come on again; eh, Tom? Would we--?"

Mr. Damon did not finish, but Tom knew what he meant.

"It would have been all up with us," he said simply. "I might have
volplaned back to earth, but at the speed we were going, and at the
height, around a curve, we might have turned turtle."

"Bless my--!" began Mr. Damon, and then he stopped. The thought of
Tom's trouble came to him, and he realized that his words might grate
on the feelings of his companion.

On they rushed through the air with the Humming-Bird speeded up faster
and faster as she warmed to her task. The machinery seemed to be
working perfectly, and as Tom listened to the hum a look of pleasure
replaced the look of anxiety on his face.

"Don't you think we'll make it?" asked Mr. Damon, after another pause,
during which they passed over a large city, the inhabitants exhibiting
much excitement as they sighted the airship over their heads.

"We've got to make it!" declared Tom between his clenched teeth.

He turned on a little more gasoline, and there was a spurt in their
speed which made Mr. Damon grasp the upright braces near him with firm
hands, and his face became a little paler.

"It's all right," spoke Tom, reassuringly. "There's no danger."

But Tom almost reckoned without his host, for a few moments later, as
he was trying to get more revolutions out of the propellers, he ran
into an adverse current of air.

In an instant the Humming-Bird was tilted up almost on her "beams'
ends," so to speak, and had it not been that the young inventor quickly
warped the wing tips, to counteract the pressure on one side, there
might have been a different end to this story.

"Bless my----!" began Mr. Damon, but he got no further, for he had to
bend his body as Tom did, to equalize the pressure of the wind current.

"A little farther over!" yelled the lad. "A little farther over this
way, Mr. Damon!"

"But if I come any more toward you I'll be out of my seat!" objected
the eccentric man.

"If you don't you'll be out of the aeroplane!" cried Tom grimly, and
his companion leaned over as far as he could until the young pilot had
brought the craft to an even keel again.

Then Tom speeded up the motor, which he had partly shut down as they
passed through the danger zone, and again they were racing through
space.

They were nearing Shopton now, as the lad and Mr. Damon could tell by
the familiar landmarks which loomed up in sight. Tom strained his eyes
for the first view of his home.

Suddenly, as they were skimming along, there came a cessation of the
hum and roar that told of the perfectly-working motor. It was an
ominous silence.

"What's--what's wrong?" gasped Mr. Damon.

"Something's given way," answered Tom quickly. "I'm afraid the magneto
isn't sparking as it ought to."

"Well, can't we volplane back to earth?" asked the odd man, for he had
become familiar with this feat when anything happened to the motor.

"We could," answered Tom, "but I'm not going to."

"Why not?"

"Because we're too far from Shopton--and dad! I'm going to keep on.
I've got to--if I want to be there in time!"

"But if the motor doesn't work?"

"I'll make her work!"

Tom was desperately manipulating the various levers and handles
connected with the electrical ignition system. He tried in vain to get
the magneto to resume the giving out of sparks, and, failing in that,
he switched on the batteries. But, to his horror, the dry cells had
given out. There was no way of getting a spark unless the little
electrical machine would work.

The propellers were still whirring around by their own momentum, and if
Tom could switch in the magneto in time all might yet be well.

They had started to fall, but, by quickly bringing up the head plane
tips, Tom sent his craft soaring upward again on a bank of air.

"Here!" he cried to Mr. Damon. "Take the steering-wheel and kept her on
this level as long as you can."

"What are you going to do?"

"I've got to fix that magneto!"

"But if she dips down?"

"Throw up the head planes as I did. It's our only chance! I can't go
down now, so far from Shopton!"

Mr. Damon reached over and took the wheel from Tom's hands. Then the
young inventor, leaning forward, for the magneto was within easy reach,
looked to see what the trouble was. He found it quickly. A wire had
vibrated loose from a binding-post. In a second Tom had it in place
again; and, ere the propellers had ceased revolving, he had turned the
switch. The magneto took up the work in a flash. Once more the spark
exploded the gasoline mixture, and the propellers sent the Humming-Bird
swiftly ahead.

"We'll make it now!" declared Tom grimly.

"We're almost there," added Mr. Damon, as he relinquished the wheel to
the young pilot. The craft had gone down some, but Tom sent her up
again.

Nearer and nearer home they came, until at last the spires of the
Shopton churches loomed into view. Then he was over the village. Now he
was within sight of his own house.

Tom coasted down a bank of air, and brought the Humming-Bird up with a
jerk of the ground brakes. Before the wheels had ceased turning he had
leaped out.

"It's Massa Tom!" cried Eradicate, as he saw Tom alight.

The young inventor hurried into the house. He was met by the nurse, who
held up a warning finger. Tom's heart almost stopped beating. He was
aware that Dr. Gladby came from the room where Mr. Swift lay.

"Is he--is he--am I too late?" gulped Tom.

"Hush!" cautioned the nurse.

Tom reeled, and would have fallen had not the doctor caught him, for
the lad was weak and worn out.

"He is going to get well!" were the joyful words he heard, as if in a
dream, and then his strength suddenly came back to him. "The crisis is
just passed, Tom," went on Dr. Gladby, "and your father will recover,
and be stronger than ever. Your good news of winning was like a tonic
to him. Now let me congratulate you on the race." Tom had flashed by
wireless a brief message of his success.

"Dad's news is better than all the congratulations in the world," he
said softly, as he grasped the doctor's hand.

       *       *       *       *       *

It was a week later. Mr. Swift improved rapidly once the course of the
disease was permanently checked, and he was soon able to sit up. Tom
was with him in the room, talking of the great race, and how he had
won. He fingered the certified check for ten thousand dollars that had
just come to him by mail.

"You certainly did wonderfully well," said the aged inventor, softly.
"Wonderfully well, Tom. I'm proud of you."

"You may well be," added Mr. Damon. "Bless my shoelaces, but I thought
Andy Foger had us there one spell; didn't you, Tom?"

"Indeed I did. But you helped me win, Mr. Damon."

"Nonsense!" exclaimed the odd man.

"Yes, you did. You helped me a lot."

"Well, are you going to keep after more air-prizes, Tom, or are you
going to try for something else?" asked his father.

"I don't believe I'll go in any more aeroplane races right away,"
answered the young inventor. "For some time I've been wanting to
complete and perfect my electric rifle. I think I'll begin work on that
soon."

"And go hunting?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I think so," answered Tom, dreamily. "I don't know just where, though."

Where he went, and what he shot, will be told in the next volume of
this series, to be called: "Tom Swift and His Electric Rifle; or,
Daring Adventures in Elephant Land."

For a few moments after Tom's announcement no one spoke, then the young
inventor said:

"It's too bad that first set of plans were stolen. If I had them I
could make a good deal with the Government about my little aeroplane.
But they don't want to take up with it as long as there is a chance of
some foreign nation getting information about the secret parts, and my
patents won't hold abroad. I wonder if there is any way of getting
those plans away from Andy Foger? I don't understand why he hasn't used
them before this. I thought sure he would make a craft like the
Humming-Bird to race against me."

"What plans are those?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Why, don't you remember?" asked Tom. "The ones I showed you one day,
in the library, when you fell asleep, and some one slipped in and stole
them."

A curious look came over Mr. Swift's face. He passed his hand across
his brow.

"I am beginning to remember something I have been trying to recall ever
since I became ill," he said slowly. "It is coming back to me. Those
plans--in the library--I fell asleep, but before I did so I hid those
plans, Tom!"

"You hid those plans!" Tom fairly shouted the words.

"Yes, I remember feeling a drowsy feeling coming on, and I feared lest
some one might see the drawings. I got up and put them under the
window, in a little, hollow place in the foundation wall. Then I came
back in through the window again, and went to sleep. Then, on account
of my illness, just as I once before forgot something, and thought the
minister had called, I lost all recollection of them. I hid those
plans."

Tom leaped to his feet. He rushed to the place named by his father.
Soon his triumphant shout told of his success. He came hurrying back
into the house with a roll of papers in his hands.

And there were the long-missing plans! damp and stained by the weather,
but all there. No enemy had them, and Tom's secret was safe.

"Now I can accept the Government offer!" he cried. And a few weeks
later he made a most advantageous deal with the United States officials
for his patents.

Dr. Gladby explained that Mr. Swift's queer action was due to his
illness. He became liable to lapses of memory, and one happened just
after he hid away the plans. Even the hiding of them was caused by the
peculiar condition of his brain. He had opened the library window,
slipped oot with the papers, and hastened in again, to fall asleep in
his chair, during the short time Tom was gone.

"And Andy Foger never took them at all," remarked Mary Nestor, when Tom
was telling her about it a few days afterward.

"No. I guess I must apologize to him." Which Tom did, but Andy did not
receive it very graciously, especially as Tom accused him of trying to
destroy the Humming-Bird.

Andy denied this and denied having anything to do with the mysterious
fire, and, as there was no way to prove him guilty, Tom could not
proceed against him. So the matter was dropped.

Mr. Swift continued to improve, and was soon himself again, and able to
resume his inventive work. Tom received several offers to give
exhibition flights at big aero meets, but refused, as he was busy on
his new rifle. Mr. Damon helped him.

Andy Foger made several successful flights in his queer aeroplane,
which turned out to be the product of a German genius who was supplied
with money by Mr. Foger. Andy became very proud, and boasted that he
and the German were going abroad to give flights in Europe.

"I'd be glad if he would," said Tom, when he heard of the plan. "He
wouldn't bother me then."

With the money received from winning the big race, and from his
contracts from the Government, Tom Swift was now in a fair way to
become quite wealthy. He was destined to have many more adventures;
yet, come what might, never would he forget the thrilling happenings
that fell to his lot while flying for the ten-thousand dollar prize in
his sky racer.

========================================
========================================

TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT

or

The Speediest Car on the Road


by

VICTOR APPLETON




Tom Swift and His Electric Runabout




CONTENTS


CHAPTER

     I  TOM HOPES FOR A PRIZE
    II  MR. DAMON'S STEERING
   III  THE MOTOR-CYCLE WINS
    IV  TALE OF A NEW BANK
     V  A MIDNIGHT ENCOUNTER
    VI  BUILDING THE CAR
   VII  TOM IS CAPTURED
  VIII  A BLINDING FLASH
    IX  TOM IS RESCUED
     X  TOM HAS A FALL
    XI  CROSSED WIRES
   XII  THE TRYOUT
  XIII  TOWED BY A MULE
   XIV  A GREAT RUN
    XV  ANDY FOGER'S BLACK EYE
   XVI  TROUBLE AT THE BANK
  XVII  A RUN ON THE BANK
 XVIII  AFTER THE CASH
   XIX  STOPPED ON THE ROAD
    XX  ON TIME
   XXI  OFF TO THE BIG RACE
  XXII  IN A DITCH
  XIII  THE POWER GONE
   XIV  ON THE TRACK
   XXV  WINNING THE PRIZE




TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT



CHAPTER I

TOM HOPES FOR A PRIZE


"Father," exclaimed Tom Swift, looking up from a paper he was reading,
"I think I can win that prize!"

"What prize is that?" inquired the aged inventor, gazing away from a
drawing of a complicated machine, and pausing in his task of making
some intricate calculations. "You don't mean to say, Tom, that you're
going to have a try for a government prize for a submarine, after all."

"No, not a submarine prize, dad," and the youth laughed.  "Though our
Advance would take the prize away from almost any other under-water
boat, I imagine. No, it's another prize I'm thinking about."

"What do you mean?"

"Well, I see by this paper that the Touring Club of America has offered
three thousand dollars for the speediest electric car.  The tests are
to come off this fall, on a new and specially built track on Long
Island, and it's to be an endurance contest for twenty-four hours, or a
race for distance, they haven't yet decided. But I'm going to have a
try for it, dad, and, besides winning the prize, I think I'll take Andy
Foger down a peg.

"What's Andy been doing now?"

"Oh, nothing more than usual. He's always mean, and looking for a
chance to make trouble for me, but I didn't refer to anything special.
He has a new auto, you know, and he boasts that it's the fastest one in
this country. I'll show him that it isn't, for I'm going to win this
prize with the speediest car on the road."

"But, Tom, you haven't any automobile, you know," and Mr. Swift looked
anxiously at his son, who was smiling confidently. "You can't be going
to make your motor-cycle into an auto; are you?"

"No, dad."

"Then how are you going to take part in the prize contest?  Besides,
electric cars, as far as I know, aren't specially speedy."

"I know it, and one reason why this club has arranged the contest is to
improve the quality of electric automobiles. I'm going to build an
electric runabout, dad."

"An electric runabout?  But it will have to be operated with a storage
battery, Tom, and you haven't--"

"I guess you're going to say I haven't any storage battery, dad,"
interrupted Mr. Swift's son. "Well, I haven't yet, but I'm going to
have one. I've been working on--"

"Oh, ho!" exclaimed the aged inventor with a laugh. "So that's what
you've been tinkering over these last few weeks, eh, Tom?  I suspected
it was some new invention, but I didn't suppose it was that. Well, how
are you coming on with it?"

"Pretty good, I think. I've got a new idea for a battery, and I made an
experimental one. I gave it some pretty severe tests, and it worked
fine."

"But you haven't tried it out in a car yet, over rough roads, and under
severe conditions have you?"

"No, I haven't had a chance. In fact, when I invented the battery I had
no idea of using it on a car I thought it might answer for commercial
purposes, or for storing a current generated by windmills. But when I
read that account in the papers of the Touring Club, offering a prize
for the best electric car, it occurred to me that I might put my
battery into an auto, and win."

"Hum," remarked Mr. Swift musingly. "I don't take much stock in
electric autos, Tom. Gasolene seems to be the best, or perhaps steam,
generated by gasolene. I'm afraid you'll be disappointed.  All the
electric runabouts I ever saw, while they were very nice cars, didn't
seem able to go so very fast, or very far."

"That's true, but it's because they didn't have the right kind of a
battery. You know an electric locomotive can make pretty good speed,
Dad. Over a hundred miles an hour in tests."

"Yes, but they don't run by storage batteries. They have a third rail,
and powerful motors," and Mr. Swift looked quizzically at his son. He
loved to argue with him, for he said it made Tom think, and often the
two would thus thresh out some knotty point of an invention, to the
interests of both.

"Of course, Dad, there is a good deal of theory in what I'm thinking
of," the lad admitted. "But it does seem to me that if you put the
right kind of a battery into an automobile, it could scoot along pretty
lively. Look what speed a trolley car can make."

"Yes, Tom, but there again they get their power from an overhead wire."

"Some of them don't. There's a new storage battery been invented by a
New Jersey man, which does as well as the third rail or the overhead
wire. It was after reading about his battery that I thought of a plan
for mine. It isn't anything like his; perhaps not as good in some ways,
but, for what I want, it is better in some respects, I think. For one
thing it can be recharged very quickly."

"Now Tom, look here," said Mr. Swift earnestly, laying aside his
papers, and coming over to where his son sat. "You know I never
interfere with your inventions. In fact, the more you think of the
better I like it. The airship you helped build certainly did all that
could be desired, and--"

"That reminds me. Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon are out in it now,"
interrupted Tom. "They ought to be back soon. Yes, Dad, the airship Red
Cloud certainly scooted along."

"And the submarine, too," continued the aged inventor. "Your ideas
regarding that were of service to me, and helped in our task of
recovering the treasure, but I'm afraid you're going to be disappointed
in the storage battery. You may get it to work, but I don't believe you
can make it powerful enough to attain any great speed. Why don't you
confine yourself to making a battery for stationary work?"

"Because, Dad, I believe I can build a speedy car, and I'm going to try
it. Besides I want to race Andy Foger, and beat him, even if I don't
win the prize. I'm going to build that car, and it will make fast time."

"Well, go ahead, Tom," responded his father, after a pause. "Of course
you can use the shops here as much as you want, and Mr. Sharp, Mr.
Jackson, and I will help you all we can. Only don't be disappointed,
that's all."

"I won't, Dad. Suppose you come out to my shop and I'll show you a
sample battery I've been testing for the last week. I have it geared to
a small motor, and it's been running steadily for some time. I want to
see what sort of a record it's made."

Father and son crossed the yard, and entered a shop which the lad
considered exclusively his own. There he had made many machines, and
pieces of apparatus, and had invented a number of articles which had
been patented, and yielded him considerable of an income.

"There's the battery, Dad," he said, pointing to a complicated
mechanism in one corner.

"What's that buzzing noise?" asked Mr. Swift. "That's the little motor
I run from the new cells. Look here," and Tom switched on an electric
light above the experimental battery, from which he hoped so much. It
consisted of a steel can, about the size of the square gallon tin in
which maple syrup comes, and from it ran two wires which were attached
to a small motor that was industriously whirring away.

Tom looked at a registering gauge connected with it.

"That's pretty good," remarked the young inventor.

"What is it, Tom?" and his father peered about the shop.

"Why this motor has run an equivalent of two hundred miles on one
charging of the battery! That's much better than I expected.  I thought
if I got a hundred out of it I'd be doing well. Dad, I believe, after I
improve my battery a bit, that I'll have the very thing I want!  I'll
install a set of them in a car, and it will go like the wind. I'll--"
Tom's enthusiastic remarks were suddenly interrupted by a low, rumbling
sound.

"Thunder!" exclaimed Mr. Swift. "The storm is coming, and Mr. Sharp and
Mr. Damon in the airship--"

Hardly had he spoken than there sounded a crash on the roof of the
Swift house, not far away. At the same time there came cries of
distress, and the crash was repeated.

"Come on, Dad!  Something has happened!" yelled Tom, dashing from the
shop, followed by his parent. They found themselves in the midst of a
rain storm, as they raced toward the house, on the roof of which the
smashing noise was again heard.




CHAPTER II

MR. DAMON'S STEERING


Tom Swift was a lad of action, and his quickness in hurrying out to
investigate what had happened when he was explaining about his new
battery, was characteristic of him. Those of my readers who know him,
through having read the previous books of this series, need not be told
this, but you who, perhaps, are just making his acquaintance, may care
to know a little more about him.

As told in my first book, "Tom Swift and His Motor-Cycle" the young
inventor lived with his father, Barton Swift, a widower, in the town of
Shopton, New York. Mr. Swift was also an inventor of note.

In my initial volume of this series, Tom became possessed of a
motor-cycle in a peculiar way. It was sold to him by a Mr. Wakefield
Damon, a wealthy gentleman who was unfortunate in riding it. On his
speedy machine, which Tom improved by several inventions, he had a
number of adventures. The principal one was being attacked by a number
of bad men, known as the "Happy Harry Gang," who wished to obtain
possession of a valuable turbine patent model belonging to Mr. Swift.
Tom was taking it to a lawyer, when he was waylaid, and chloroformed.
Later he traced the gang, and, with the assistance of Mr. Damon and
Eradicate Sampson, an aged colored man who made a living for himself
and his mule, Boomerang, by doing odd jobs, the lad found the thieves
and recovered a motor-boat which had been stolen. But the men got away.

In the second volume, called "Tom Swift and His Motor-Boat," Tom bought
at auction the boat stolen by, and recovered from, the thieves, and
proceeded to improve it. While he was taking his father out on a cruise
for Mr. Swift's health, the Happy Harry Gang made a successful attempt
to steal some valuable inventions from the Swift house. Tom started to
trace them, and incidentally he raced and beat Andy Foger, a rich
bully. On their way down the lake, after the robbery, Tom, his father
and Ned Newton, Tom's chum, saw a man hanging from the trapeze of a
blazing balloon over Lake Carlopa. The balloonist was Mr. John Sharp
and he was rescued by Tom in a thrilling fashion. In his motor-boat,
Tom had much pleasure, not the least of which was taking out a young
lady named Miss Mary Nestor, whose acquaintance he had made after
stopping her runaway horse, which his bicycle had frightened.  Tom's
association with  Miss Nestor soon ripened into something deeper than
mere friendship.

It developed that Mr. Sharp, whom Tom had saved from the burning
balloon, was an aeronaut of note, and had once planned to build an
airship. After his recovery from his thrilling experience, he mentioned
the matter to Mr. Swift and his son, with whom he took up his
residence. This fitted right in with Tom's ideas, and soon father, son
and the balloonist were constructing the Red Cloud, as they named their
airship. It was finally completed, as related in "Tom Swift and His
Airship," made a successful trial trip, and won a prize. It was planned
to make a longer journey, and Tom, Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon agreed to go
together. Mr. Damon was an odd individual, who was continuously
blessing some part of his anatomy, his clothing or some inanimate
object but, for all that, he was a fine man.

The night before Tom and his friends started off in their airship, the
Shopton Bank vault was blown open and seventy-five thousand dollars was
taken. Tom and his friends did not know of this, but, no sooner had the
young inventor, Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon sailed away, than the police
arrived at Mr. Swift's house to arrest them. They were charged with the
robbery, and with having sailed away with the booty.

It appeared that Andy Foger said he had seen Tom hanging around the
bank the night of the robbery, with a bag of burglar tools in his
possession. Search was immediately begun for the airship, the occupants
of which were, meanwhile, speeding on.

Tom and his two friends had trouble. They were nearly burned up in a
forest fire, and were fired upon by a crowd of people with rifles, who,
reading of the bank robbery and the reward offered for the capture of
the thieves, hoped to bring down the airship.  The fact that they were
fired upon caused Tom and the two aeronauts to descend to make an
investigation, and for the first time they learned of the bank theft.
How they got track of the real robbers, took the sheriff with them in
the airship, and raided the gang will be found set down at length in
the book.  Also how Tom administered well-deserved thrashing to Andy
Foger.

Mr. Swift did not accompany his son in the airship, and when asked why
he did not care to make the trip, said he was working on a new type of
submarine boat, which he hoped to enter in the government trials, to
win a prize. In the fourth volume of the series, called "Tom Swift and
his Submarine," you may read how successful Mr. Swift was.

When the submarine, called the Advance, was finished, the party made a
trip to recover three hundred thousand dollars in gold from a sunken
treasure ship, off the coast of Uruguay, South America. They sailed
beneath the seas for many miles, and were in great peril at times. One
reason for this was that a rival firm of submarine builders got wind of
the treasure, and tried to get ahead of the Swifts in recovering it.
How Tom and his friends succeeded in their quest, how they nearly
perished at the bottom of the sea, how they were captured by a foreign
war vessel, and sentenced to death, how they fought with a school of
giant sharks and how they blew up the wreck to recover the money is all
told of in the book.

On their return to civilization with the gold, Mr. Swift, Tom, and
their friends deposited the money in the Shopton Bank, where Ned Newton
worked. Ned was a bright lad, but had not been advanced as rapidly as
he deserved, and Tom knew this. He asked his father to speak to the
president, Mr. Pendergast, in Ned's behalf, and, as a result the lad
was made assistant cashier, for the request of a man who controlled a
three hundred thousand dollar deposit was not to be despised.

In building the submarine Tom and his father rented a large cottage on
the New Jersey seacoast, but, on returning from their treasure-quest
they went back to Shopton, leaving the submarine at the boathouse of
the shore cottage, which was near the city of Atlantis. That was in the
fall of the year, and all that winter the young inventor had been busy
on many things, not the least of which was his storage battery. It was
now spring, and seeing the item in the paper, about the touring club
prize for an electric auto, had given him a new idea.

But all thoughts of electric cars, and everything else, were driven
from the mind of the young man, when, with his father, he rushed out to
see the cause of the crash on the roof of the Swift homestead.

"There's something up there, Tom," called his father, as he splashed on
through the rain.

"That's right," added his son. "And somebody, too, to judge by the fuss
they're making."

"Maybe the house has been struck by lightning!" suggested the aged
inventor.

"No, the storm isn't severe enough for that; and, besides, if the house
had been struck you'd hear Mrs. Baggert yelling, Dad.  She--"

At that moment a woman's voice cried out:

"Mr. Swift! Tom! Where are you? Something dreadful has happened!"

"There she goes!" remarked Mr. Swift, as he splashed into a mud puddle.

"Bless my deflection rudder!" suddenly cried a voice from the flat roof
of the Swift house. "Hello! I say, is anyone down there?"

"Yes, we are," answered Tom. "Is that you, Mr. Damon?"

"Bless my collar button! It certainly is."

"Where's Mr. Sharp? I don't hear him."

"Oh, I'm here all right," answered the balloonist. "I'm trying to get
the airship clear of the chimney. Mr. Damon--"

"Yes, I steered wrong!" interrupted the odd man. "Bless my liver pin,
but it was so dark I couldn't see, and when that clap of thunder came I
shifted the deflection rudder instead of the lateral one, and tried to
knock over your chimney."

"Are either of you hurt?" asked Mr. Swift anxiously.

"No, not at all," replied Mr. Sharp. "We were moving slowly, ready for
a landing."

"Is the airship damaged?" inquired Tom.

"I don't know. Not much, I guess," was the answer of the aeronaut.
"I've stopped the engine, and I don't like to start it again until I
can see what shape we're in."

"I'll come up, with Mr. Jackson," called Tom, and he hastily summoned
Garret Jackson, an engineer, who had been in the service of Mr. Swift
for many years. Together they proceeded to the roof by a stairway that
led to a scuttle.

"Is anyone killed?" asked Mrs. Baggert, as Tom hurried up the stairs.
"Don't tell me there is, Tom!"

"Well, I don't have to tell you, for no one is," replied the young
inventor with a laugh. "It's all right. The airship tried to collide
with the chimney, that's all."

He was soon on the large, flat roof of the dwelling, and, with the aid
of lanterns he, the engineer, and Mr. Sharp made a hasty examination.

"Anything wrong?" inquired Mr. Damon, looking out from the cabin of the
Red Cloud where he had taken refuge after the crash, and to get out of
the wet.

"Not much," answered Tom. "One of the forward planes is smashed, but we
can rise by means of the gas, and float down. Is all clear, Mr. Sharp?"

"All clear," replied the balloonist, for the airship had now been
wheeled back from the entanglement with the chimney.

"Then here we go!" cried Tom, as he and the aeronaut entered the craft,
while Mr. Jackson descended through the scuttle.

There came a fiercer burst to the storm, and, amid a series of dazzling
lightning flashes and the muttering of thunder, the airship rose from
the roof. Tom switched on the search-light, and, starting the big
propellers, guided the craft skillfully toward the big shed where it
was housed when not in use.

With the grace of a bird it turned about in the air, and settled to the
ground. It was the work of but a few minutes to run it into the shed.
Then they all started for the house.

"Bless my umbrella!  How it rains!" cried Mr. Damon, as he splashed on
through numerous puddles. "We got back just in time, Mr. Sharp."

"Where did you go?" asked the lad.

"Why we took a flight of about fifty miles and stopped at my house in
Waterfield for supper. Were you anxious about us?"

"A little when it began to storm," replied Tom.

"Anything new since we left?" asked Mr. Sharp, for it was the custom of
himself, or some of his friends, to take little trips in the airship.
They thought no more of it than many do of going for a short spin in an
automobile.

"Yes, there is something new," said Mr. Swift, as the party, all
drenched now, reached the broad veranda.

"Bless my gaiters!" cried Mr. Damon. "What is it? I hope the Happy
Harry gang hasn't robbed you again; nor Berg and his men tried to take
that treasure away from us, after we worked so hard to get it from the
wreck."

"No, it isn't that," replied Mr. Swift. "The truth is that Tom thinks
he has invented a storage battery that will revolutionize matters. He's
going to build an electric automobile, he says."

"I am," declared the lad, as the others looked at him, "and it will be
the speediest one you ever saw, too!"




CHAPTER III

THE MOTORCYCLE WINS


"Well, Tom," remarked Mr. Sharp, after a pause following the lad's
announcement. "I didn't know you had any ambitions in that line. Tell
us more about the battery. What system do you use; lead plates and
sulphuric acid?"

"Oh, that's out of date long ago," declared the lad.

"Well, I don't know much about electricity," admitted the aeronaut.
"I'll take my chances in an airship or a balloon, but when it comes to
electricity I'm down and out."

"So am I," admitted Mr. Damon. "Bless my gizzard, it's all I can do to
put a new spark plug in my automobile. Where is your new battery, Tom?"

"Out in my shop, running yet if it hasn't been frightened by the
airship smash," replied the lad, somewhat proudly. "It's an oxide of
nickel battery, with steel and oxide of iron negative electrodes."

"What solution do you use, Tom?" asked Mr. Swift. "I didn't get that
far in questioning you before the crash came," he added.

"Well I have, in the experimental battery, a solution of potassium
hydrate," replied the lad, "but I think I'm going to change it, and add
some lithium hydrate to it. I think that will make it stronger."

"Bless my watch chain!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "It's all Greek to me.
Suppose you let us see it, Tom? I like to see wheels go 'round, but I'm
not much of a hand for chemical terms."

"If you're sure you're not hurt by the airship smash, I will," declared
the lad.

"Oh, we're not hurt a bit," insisted Mr. Sharp. "As I said we were
moving slow, for I knew it was about time to land. Mr. Damon was
steering--"

"Yes I thought I'd try my hand at it, as it seemed so easy,"
interrupted the eccentric man. "But never again--not for mine! I
couldn't see the house, and, before I knew it we were right over the
roof. Then the chimney seemed to stick itself up suddenly in front of
us, and--well, you know the rest. I'm willing to pay for any damage I
caused."

"Oh, not at all!" replied Tom. "It's easy enough to put on a new plane,
or, for that matter, we can operate the Red Cloud without it. But come
on, I'll show you my sample battery."

"Here, take umbrellas!" Mrs. Baggert called after them as they started
toward the shop, for it was still raining.

"We don't mind getting wet," replied the young inventor. "It's in the
interests of science."

"Maybe it is. You don't mind a wetting, but I mind you coming in and
dripping water all over the carpets!" retorted the housekeeper.

"Bless my overshoes, I'm afraid we have wet the carpets a trifle now,"
admitted Mr. Damon ruefully, as he looked down at a puddle, which had
formed where he had been standing.

"That's the reason I want you to take umbrellas this trip," insisted
Mrs. Baggert.

They complied, and were soon in the shop, where Tom explained his
battery. The small motor was still running and had, as the lad had
said, gone the equivalent of over two hundred miles.

"If a small battery does as well as that, what will a larger one do?"
asked Mr. Damon.

"Much better, I hope," replied the youth. "But Dad doesn't seem to have
much faith in them."

"Well," admitted Mr. Swift, "I must say I am skeptical. Still, I
acknowledge Tom has done some pretty good work along electrical lines.
He helped me with the positive and negative plates on the submarine,
and, maybe--well, we'll wait and see," he concluded.

"If you build a car I hope you give me a ride in it," said Mr. Damon.
"I've ridden fast in the air, and swiftly on top of, and under, the
water. Now I'd like to ride rapidly on top of the earth. The gasolene
auto doesn't go very fast."

"I'll give you a ride that will make your hair stand up!" prophesied
Tom, and the time was to come when he would make good that prediction.

The little party in the machine shop talked at some length about Tom's
battery. He showed them how it was constructed, and gave them some of
his ideas regarding the new type of auto he planned to build.

"Well," remarked Mr. Swift at length, "if you want to keep your brain
fresh, Tom, you must get to bed earlier than this. It's nearly twelve
o'clock."

"And I want to get up early!" exclaimed the lad. "I'm going to start to
build a larger battery to-morrow."

"And I'm going to repair the airship," added Mr. Sharp.

"Bless my night cap, I promised my wife I'd be home early to-night,
too!" suddenly exclaimed Mr. Damon. "I don't fancy making the trip back
to Waterfield in my auto, though. Something will be sure to happen.
I'll blow out a tire, or a spark plug will get sooty on me and--"

"It's raining harder than ever," interrupted Tom. "Better stay here
to-night. You can telephone home."  Which Mr. Damon did.

Tom was up early the next morning, in spite of the fact that he did not
go to bed in good season, and before breakfast he was working at his
new storage battery. After the meal he hurried back to the shop, but it
was not long before he came out, wheeling his motor-cycle.

"Where are you going, Tom?" asked Mrs. Baggert.

"Oh, I've got to go to Mansburg to get some steel tubes for my new
battery," he replied. "I thought I had some large enough, but I
haven't."  Mansburg was a good-sized town, near Shopton.

"Then I wish you'd bring me a bottle of stove polish," requested the
housekeeper. "The liquid kind. I'm out of it, and the stove is as red
as a cow."

"All right," agreed the lad, as he leaped into the saddle and pedaled
off down the road. A moment later he had turned on the power, and was
speeding along the highway, which was in good condition on account of
the shower of the night before.

Tom was thinking so deeply of his new invention, and planning what he
would do when he had his electric runabout built, that, almost before
he knew it, he had reached Mansburg, purchased the steel tubes, and the
stove polish, and was on his way back again.

As he was speeding along on a level road, he heard, coming behind him,
an automobile. The lad turned to one side, but, in spite of this the
party in the car began a serenade of the electric siren, and kept it
up, making a wild discord.

"What's the matter with those fellows!" inquired Tom of himself.
"Haven't I given them enough of the road, or has their steering gear
broken?"

He looked back over his shoulder, and it needed but a glance to show
that the car was all right, as regarded the steering apparatus. And it
needed only another glance to disclose the reason for the shrill sound
of the siren.

"Andy Foger!" exclaimed Tom. "I might have known. And Sam and Pete are
with him. Well, if he wants to make me get off the road, he'll find
that I've got as much right as he has!"

He kept on a straight course, wondering if the red-haired, and
squint-eyed bully would dare try to damage the motor-cycle.

A little later Andy's car was beside Tom.

"Why don't you get out of the way," demanded Sam, who could usually be
depended on to aid Andy in all his mean tricks.

"Because I'm entitled to half the road," retorted our hero.

"Humph! A slow-moving machine like yours hasn't any right on the road,"
sneered Andy, who had slowed down his car somewhat.

"I haven't, eh?" demanded Tom. "Well, if you'll get down out of that
car for a few minutes I'll soon show you what my rights are!"

Now Andy, more than once, had come to personal encounters with Tom,
much to the anguish of the bully. He did not relish another
chastisement, but his mean spirit could not brook interference.

"Don't you want a race?" he inquired of Tom, in a sneering tone. "I'll
give you a mile start, and beat you! I've got the fastest car built!"

"You have, eh?" asked Tom, while a grim look came over his face. "Maybe
you'll think differently some day."

"Aw, he's afraid to race; come on," suggested Pete. "Don't bother with
him, Andy."

"No, I guess it wouldn't be worth my while," was the reply of the
bully, and he threw the second gear into place, and began to move away
from the young inventor.

Tom was just as much pleased to be left alone, but he did not want Andy
Foger to think that he could have matters all his own way. Tom's
motor-cycle, since he had made some adjustments to it, was very swift.
In fact there were few autos that could beat it.  He had never tried it
against Andy's new car, and he was anxious to do so.

"I wonder if I would stand any chance, racing him?" thought the young
inventor, as he saw the car slowly pulling away from him.  "I think
I'll wait until he gets some distance ahead, and then I'll see how near
I can come to him. If I get anywhere near him I'm pretty sure I can
pass him. I'll try it."

When Andy and his cronies looked back, Tom did not appear to be doing
anything save moving along at moderate speed on his machine.

"You don't dare race!" Pete Bailey shouted to him.

"Wait," was what Tom whispered to himself.

Andy's car was now some distance ahead. The young inventor waited a
little longer, and then turned more power into his machine. It leaped
forward and began to "eat up the road," as Tom expressed it. He had
seen Andy throw in the third gear, but knew that there was a fourth
speed on the bully's car.

"I don't know whether I can beat him on that or not," thought the lad
dubiously. "If I try, and fail, they'll laugh at me. But I don't think
I'm going to fail."

Faster and faster he rode. He was rapidly overhauling Andy's car now,
and, as they heard him approach, the three cronies turned around.

"He's going to race you, after all, Andy!" cried Sam.

"You mean he's going to try," sneered Andy. "I'll give him all the
racing he wants!"

In another few seconds Tom was beside the auto, and would have passed
it, only Andy opened his throttle a little more. For a moment the auto
jumped ahead, and then, as our hero turned on still more power, he
easily held his own.

"Aw, you can never beat us!" yelled Pete.

"Of course not!" added Sam.

"I'll leave him behind in a second," prophesied Andy. "Wait until I
throw in the other gear," he added to his cronies in a low voice. "He
thinks he's going to beat me. I'll let him think so, and then I'll
spurt ahead."

The two machines were now racing along side by side. Andy's car was
going the limit on third gear, but he still had the fourth gear in
reserve. Tom, too, still had a little margin of speed.

Suddenly Andy reached forward and yanked on a lever. There was a
grinding of cogs as the fourth gear slipped into place, for Andy did
not handle his car skillfully. The effect, however, was at once
apparent. The automobile shot forward.

"Now where are you, Tom Swift?" cried Sam.

Tom said nothing. He merely shifted a lever, and got a better spark. He
also turned on a little more gasolene and opened the muffler. The
quickness with which his motor-cycle shot forward almost threw him from
the saddle, but he had a tight grip on the handle bars. He whizzed past
the auto, but, as the latter gathered speed, it crept up to him, and,
once more was on even terms. Much chagrined at seeing Tom hold pace
with him, even for an instant, Andy shouted:

"Get over on your own side there! You're crowding me!"

"I am not!" yelled back Tom, above the explosions of his machine.

The two were now racing furiously, and Andy, with a savage look, tried
to get more speed out of his car. In spite of all the bully did, Tom
was gradually forging ahead. A little hill was now in view.

"Here's where I make him take my dust!" cried Andy, but, to his
surprise Tom still kept ahead. The auto began to lose ground, for it
was not made to take hills on high gear.

"Change to third gear quick!" cried Sam.

Andy tried to do it. There was a hesitancy on the part of his car. It
seemed to balk. Tom, looking back, slowed up a trifle. He could afford
to, as Andy was being beaten.

"Go on! Go on!" begged Pete. "You'll have to keep on fourth gear to
beat him, Andy."

"That's what!" murmured the bully. Once more he shifted the gears.
There was a grinding, smashing sound, and the car lost speed. Then it
slowed up still more, and finally stopped. Then it began to back down
hill.

"I've stripped those blamed gears!" exclaimed Andy ruefully.

"Can't you beat him?" asked Pete.

"I could have, easily, if my gears hadn't broken," declared the bully,
but, as a matter of fact, he could not have done so. "I oughtn't to
have changed, going up hill," he added, as he jammed on the brakes, to
stop the car from sliding down the slope.

Tom saw and heard.

"I thought you were so anxious to race," he said, exultantly, as well
he might. "I don't want to try a contest down hill, though, Andy," and
he laughed at the red-haired lad, who was furious.

"Aw, go on!" was all the retort the squint-eyed one could think of to
make.

"I am going on," replied our hero. "Just to show you that I can go down
hill, watch me."

He turned his motor-cycle, and approached Andy's stalled car, for Tom
was some distance in advance of it, up the slope by this time. As he
approached the auto, containing the three disconcerted cronies,
something bounded out of Tom's pocket. It was the bottle of stove
blacking he had purchased for Mrs. Baggert. The bottle fell in the soft
dirt in front of his forward wheel, and a curious thing happened.
Perhaps you have seen a bicycle or auto tire strike a stone at an
angle, and throw it into the air with great force. That was what
happened to the bottle. Tom's front wheel struck the cork, which fitted
tightly, and, just as when you hit one end of the wooden "catty" and it
bounds up, the bottle described a curve through the air, and flew
straight toward Andy's car. It struck the brass frame of the wind
shield with a crash.

The bottle broke, and in an instant the black liquid was spattered all
over Andy, Sam and Pete. It could not have been done more effectively
if Tom had thrown it by hand. All over their clothes, their hands and
faces, and the front of the car went the dreary black. Tom looked on,
hardly able to believe what he saw.

"Wow! Wup! Ug! Blug! Mug!" spluttered Sam, who had some of the stuff in
his mouth.

"Oh! Oh!" yelled Pete.

"You did that on purpose, Tom Swift!" shouted Andy, wiping some of the
blacking from his left eye. "I'll have you arrested for that! You've
ruined my car, and look at my suit!"

"Mine's worse!" murmured Sam, glancing down at his light trousers,
which were of the polka-dot pattern now.

"No, mine is," insisted Pete, whose white shirt was of the hue of a
stove pipe.

Andy wiped some of the black stuff from his nose, whence it was
dropping on the steering wheel.

"You just wait!" the bully called to Tom. "I'll get even with you for
this!"

"It was an accident! I didn't mean to do that," explained Tom, trying
not to laugh, as he dismounted from his motor-cycle, ready to render
what assistance he could.




CHAPTER IV

TALK OF A NEW BANK


The three cronies were in a sorrowful plight. The black fluid dripped
from them, and formed little puddles in the car. Andy had used his
handkerchief to wipe some of the stuff from his face, but the linen was
soon useless, for it quickly absorbed the blacking.

"There's a little brook over here," volunteered Tom. "You might wash in
that. The stuff comes off easily. It isn't like ink," and he had to
laugh, as he thought of the happening.

"Here! You quit that!" ordered Andy. "You've gone too far, Tom Swift!"

"Didn't I tell you it was an accident?" inquired the young inventor.

"It wasn't!" cried Sam. "You threw the bottle at us! I saw you!"

"It slipped from my pocket," declared the youth, and he described how
the accident occurred. "I'll help you clean your car, Andy," he added.

"I don't want your help! If you come near me I'll--I'll punch your
nose!" cried Andy, now almost beside himself with rage.

"All right, if you don't want my help I don't care," answered Tom, glad
enough not to have to soil his hands and clothes. He felt that it was
partly his fault, and he would have done all he could to remedy
matters, but his good offers being declined, he felt that it was
useless to insist further.

He remounted his motor-cycle, and rode off, the last view he had of the
trio being one where they were at the edge of the brook, trying to
remove the worst traces of the black fluid. As Tom turned around for a
final glimpse, Andy shook his fist at him, and called out something.

"I guess Andy'll have it in for me," mused Tom. "Well, I can't help it.
I owed him something on account, but I didn't figure on paying it in
just this way," and he thought of the time the bully had locked him in
the ballast tanks of the submarine, thereby nearly smothering him to
death.

That night Andy Foger told his father what had happened, for Mr. Foger
inquired the reason for the black stains on his son's face and hands.
But Andy did not give the true version. He said Tom had purposely
thrown the bottle of blacking at him.

"So that's the kind of a lad Tom Swift is, eh?" remarked Andy's father.
"Well, Andy, I think you will soon have a chance to get even with him."

"How, pop?"

"I can't tell you now, but I have a plan for making Tom sorry he ever
did anything to you, and I will also pay back some old scores to Mr.
Swift and Mr. Damon. I'll ruin their bank for them, that's what I'll
do."

"Ruin their bank, pop? How?"

"You wait and see. The Swift crowd will get off their high horse soon,
or I'm mistaken. My plans are nearly completed, but I can't tell you
about them. I'll ruin Mr. Swift, though, that's what I'll do," and Mr.
Foger shook his head determinedly.

Tom was soon at his home, and Mrs. Baggert, hearing the noise of his
machine, as it entered the front yard, came to the side door.

"Where's my blacking?" she asked, as our hero dismounted and untied the
bundle of steel tubes he had purchased.

"I--I used it," he answered, laughing.

"Tom Swift! You don't mean to say you took my stove polish to use in
your battery, do you?"

"No, I used it to polish off Andy Foger and some of his cronies," and
the young inventor told, with much gusto, what had happened. Mrs.
Baggert could not help joining in the laugh, and when Tom offered to
ride back and purchase some more of the polish for her, she said it did
not matter, as she could wait until the next day.

The lad was soon busy in his machine shop, making several larger cells
for the new storage battery. He wanted to give it a more severe test.
He worked for several days on this, and when he had one unit of cells
complete, he attached the motor for an efficiency trial.

"We'll see how many miles that will make," he remarked to his father.

"Have you thought anything of the type of car you are going to build?"
asked the aged inventor of his son.

"Yes, somewhat. It will be almost of the regulation style, but with two
removable seats at the rear, with curtains for protection, and a place
in front for two persons. This can also be protected with curtains when
desired."

"But what about the motors and the battery?"

"They will be located under the middle of the car. There will be one
set of batteries there, together with the motor, and another set of
batteries will be placed under the removable seats in what I call the
tonneau, though, of course, it isn't really that. A smaller set will
also be placed forward, and there will be ample room for carrying tools
and such things."

"About how far do you expect your car will go with one charging of the
battery?"

"Well, if I can make it do three hundred miles I'll be satisfied, but
I'm going to try for four hundred."

"What will you do when your battery runs out?"

"Recharge it."

"Suppose you're not near a charging station?"

"Well, Dad, of course those are some of the details I've got to work
out. I'm planning a register gauge now, that will give warning about
fifty miles before the battery is run down. That will leave me a margin
to work on. And I'm going to have it fixed so I can take current from
any trolley line, as well as from a regular charging station. My battery
will be capable of being recharged very quickly, or, in case of need, I
can take out the old cells and put in new ones.

"That's a very good idea. Well, I hope you succeed."

A few evenings after this, when Tom was busy in his machine shop, he
heard some one enter. He looked up from the gauge of the motor, which
he was studying, and, for a moment, he could make out nothing in the
dark interior of the shop, for he was working in a brilliant light.

"Who's there?" he called sharply, for, more than once unscrupulous men
had endeavored to sneak into the Swift shops to steal ideas of
inventions; if not the actual apparatus itself.

"It's me--Ned Newton," was the cheerful reply.

"Oh, hello, Ned! I was wondering what had become of you," responded
Tom. "Where have you been lately?"

"Oh, working overtime."

"What's the occasion?"

"We're trying out a new system to increase the bank business."

"What's the matter? Aren't you folks getting business enough, after the
big deposits we made of the bullion from the wreck?"

"Oh, it's not that. But haven't you heard the news? There is talk of
starting a rival bank in Shopton, and that may make us hustle to hold
what business we have, to say nothing of getting new customers."

"A new bank, eh? Who's going to start it?"

"Andy Foger's father, I hear. You know he was a director in our bank,
but he got out last week."

"What for?"

"Well, he had some difficulty with Mr. Pendergast, the president. I
fancy you had something to do with it, too."

"I?"  Tom was plainly surprised.

"Yes, you know you and Mr. Damon and Mr. Sharp captured the bank
robbers, and got back most of the money."

"I guess I do remember it! I wish you could have seen the gang when we
raided them from the clouds, in our airship!"

"Well, you know Andy Foger hoped to collect the five thousand dollars
reward for telling the police that you were the thief, and of course he
got fooled, for you got the reward. Mr. Foger expected his son would
collect the money, and when Andy got left, it made him sore. He's had a
grudge against Mr. Pendergast, and all the other bank officials ever
since, and now he's going to start a rival bank. So that's why I said
it was partly due to you."

"Oh, I see. I thought at first you meant that it was on account of
something that happened the other day."

"What was that?"

"Andy, Sam and Pete got the contents of a bottle of stove blacking,"
and Tom related the occurrence, at which Ned laughed heartily.

"I wouldn't be surprised though," added Ned, "to learn that Mr. Foger
started the new bank more for revenge than anything else."

"So that's the reason you've been working late, eh?" went on Tom.
"Getting ready for competition. Do you think a new bank will hurt the
one you're with?"

"Well, it might," admitted Ned. "It's bound to make a change, anyhow,
and now that I have a good position I don't want to lose it. I take
more of an interest in the institution now that I'm assistant cashier,
than I did when I was a clerk. So, naturally, I'm a little worried."

"Say, don't let it worry you," begged Tom, earnestly.

"Why not?"

"Because I know my father and Mr. Damon will stick to the old bank.
They won't have anything to do with the one Andy Foger's father starts.
Don't you worry."

"Well, that will help some," declared Ned. "They are both heavy
depositors, and if they stick to the old bank we can stand it even if
some of our smaller customers desert us."

"That's the way to talk," went on the young inventor. "Let Foger start
his bank. It won't hurt yours."

"What are you making now?" asked Ned, a little later, looking with
interest at the machinery over which Tom was bending, and to which he
was making adjustments.

"New electric automobile. I want to beat Andy Foger's car worse than I
did on my motor-cycle, and I also want to win a prize," and the lad
proceeded to relate the incidents leading up to his construction of the
storage battery.

Tom and Ned were in the shop until long past midnight, and then the
bank employee, with a look at his watch, exclaimed:

"Great Scott! I ought to be home."

"I'll run you over in Mr. Damon's car," proposed Tom. "He left it here
the other day, while he and his wife went off on a trip, and he said I
could use it whenever I wanted to."

"Good!" cried Ned.

The two lads came from Tom's particular workshop. As the young inventor
closed the door he started suddenly, as he snapped shut the lock.

"What's the matter?" asked Ned quickly.

"I thought I heard a noise," replied Tom.

They both listened. There was a slight rustling in some bushes near the
shop.

"It's a dog or a cat," declared Ned.

Tom took several cautious steps forward. Then he gave a spring, and
made a grab for some one or something.

"Here! You let me be!" yelled a protesting voice.

"I will when I find out what you mean by sneaking around here,"
retorted Tom, as he came back toward Ned, dragging with him a lad. "It
wasn't a dog or a cat, Ned," spoke the young inventor.  "It's Sam
Snedecker," and so it proved.

"You let me alone!" demanded Andy Foger's crony. "I ain't done nothin'
to you," he whined.

"Here, Ned, you hold him a minute, while I make an investigation,"
called Tom, handing his prisoner over to his chum. "Maybe Pete or Andy
are around."

"No, they ain't. I came alone," said Sam quickly, but Tom, not heeding,
opened the shop, and, after turning on the electric lights, procured a
lantern. He began a search of the shrubbery around the shop, while Ned
held to the struggling Sam.




CHAPTER V

A MIDNIGHT ENCOUNTER


The moment Tom disappeared behind his machine shop, Sam Snedecker began
a desperate struggle to escape from Ned Newton.  Now Ned was a muscular
lad, but his work in the bank was confining, and he did not have the
chance to get out doors and exercise, as Sam had. Consequently Ned had
his hands full in holding to the squirming crony of Andy Foger.

"You let me go!" demanded Sam, as he tried to twist loose.

"Not if I know it!" panted Ned.

Sam gave a sudden twist. Ned's foot slipped in the grass, and in a
moment he went down, with Sam on top of him. Still he did not let go,
and, finding he was still a prisoner Sam adopted new tactics.

Using his fists Sam began to pound Ned, but the bank employee, though
suffering, would not call for help, to summon back Tom, who was, by
this time, at the rear of the shop, looking about.  Silently in the
dark the two fought, and Ned found that Sam was getting away. Then
Ned's hand came in contact with Sam's ear. It was the misfortune of the
bully to have rather a large hearing apparatus, and once Ned got his
fingers on an ear there was room enough to afford a good grip. He
closed his hold tightly, and began to twist. This was too much for Sam.
He set up a lusty howl.

"Wow! Ouch! Let go!" he pleaded, and he ceased to pound Ned, and no
longer tried to escape. Tom came back on the run.

"What's the matter?" he cried. Then his light flashed on the two
prostrate lads, and he understood without asking any further questions.

"Get up!" he cried, seizing Sam by the back of his neck, and yanking
him to his feet. Ned arose, and secured a better grip on the sneaking
lad.

"What's up?" demanded Tom, and Ned explained, following it by the
question:

"See any more of 'em?"

"No, I guess he was here all alone," replied the young inventor. "What
do you mean by sneaking around here this time of night?" he demanded of
the captive.

"Don't you wish you knew?" was Sam's answer, with a leer. He realized
that he had a certain advantage.

"You'd better tell before I turn you over to the police!" said Tom,
sternly.

"You--you wouldn't do that; would you?" and Sam's voice that had been
bold, became shaky.

"You were trespassing on our property, and that's against the law,"
declared Tom. "We have signs posted, warning people to keep off."

"I didn't mean any harm," whined Sam.

"Then what were you doing here, at this hour?"

"I was just taking a short cut home. I was out riding with Andy in his
auto, and it broke down. I had to walk home, and I came this way. I
didn't know you didn't allow people to cross your back lot. I wasn't
doin' anything."

Tom hesitated. Sam might be telling the truth, but it was doubtful.

"What happened to Andy's auto?" the young inventor asked.

"He broke a wheel, going over a big stone on Berk's hill. He went to
tell some one in the repair shop to go after the car, and I came on
home. You've got no right to arrest me."

"I ought to, on general principles," commented Tom. "Well, skip out,
and don't you come around here again. I'm going to get a savage bull
dog, and the first one who comes sneaking around here after dark will
be sorry. Move along now!"

Tom and Ned released their holds of Sam, and the latter lost no time in
obeying the injunction to make himself scarce. He was soon lost to
sight in the darkness.

"Think he was up to some mischief?" asked Ned.

"I'm almost sure of it," replied Tom, "but I can't see anything wrong.
I guess we were too quick for him. I believe he, Andy and Pete Bailey
tried to put up some job on me."

"Maybe they wanted to damage your new battery or car," suggested Ned.

"Hardly that. The car hasn't been started yet, and as for the battery,
no one knows of it outside of you and my friends here.  I'm keeping it
secret. Well, if I'm going to take you home I'd better get a move on.
Wait here and I'll run out Mr. Damon's car."

In a short time Tom was guiding the machine over the road to Shopton,
Ned on the seat beside him. The young assistant cashier lived about a
mile the other side of the village, and the two chums were soon at his
house. Asking his friend to come and see him when he had a chance. Ned
bid his chum good night, and the young inventor started back home.

He was driving slowly along, thinking more of his new invention than
anything else, even more than of the mysterious visit of Sam Snedecker,
when the lights on Mr. Damon's car flashed upon something big, black
and bulky on the road just ahead of him.  Tom, brought suddenly out of
his fit of musing, jammed on the brakes, and steered to one side. Then
he saw that the object was a stalled auto. He had only time to note
this when a voice hailed him:

"Have you a tire pump you could lend us? Ours doesn't work, and we have
had a blowout."

There was something about the voice that was strangely familiar, and
Tom was wondering where he had heard it before, when into the glare of
the lamps on his machine stepped Mr. Foger--Andy's father!

"Why, Mr. Foger!" exclaimed Tom. "I didn't know it was you."

"Oh, it's Tom Swift," remarked the man, and he did not seem especially
pleased.

"Hey! What's that?" cried another voice, which Tom had no difficulty in
recognizing as belonging to Andy. "What's the matter, Dad?"

"Why it happens to be your--ahem! It's Tom Swift in this other auto,"
went on Mr. Foger. "I didn't know you had a car," he added.

"I haven't," answered the lad. "This belongs to Mr. Damon. But can you
see to fix your tire in the dark?" for Mr. Foger and his son had no
lamps lighted.

"Oh, we have it all fixed," declared the man, "and, just as we were
going to pump it up out lamps went out. Then we found that our pump
wouldn't work. If you have one I would be obliged for the use of it,"
and he spoke somewhat stiffly.

"Certainly," agreed Tom, cheerfully, for he had no special grudge
against Mr. Foger, though had he known Andy's father's plans, perhaps
our hero would not have so readily aided him. The young inventor got
down, removed one of his oil lamps in order that there might be some
light on the operation, and then brought over his pump.

"I heard you had an accident," said Tom, a chain of thoughts being
rapidly forged in his mind, as he thought of what Sam had told him.

"You heard of it?" repeated Mr. Foger, while Andy was busy pumping up
the tire.

"Yes, a friend who was out riding with you said you had broken a wheel
on Berk's hill. But I see he was slightly wrong. You're a good way from
Berk's hill, and it's a tire that is broken, not a wheel."

"But I don't understand," said Mr. Foger. "No friend has been out
riding with us. My son and I were out on a business trip, and--"

"Come on, pop. I've got it all pumped up. Jump in. There's your pump,
Tom Swift. Much obliged," muttered Andy hastily.  It was very evident
that he wanted to prevent any further conversation between his parent
and Tom.

"But I don't understand," went on the banker, clearly puzzled.  "What
friend gave you such information, Mr.--er--Tom Swift?"

"Sam Snedecker," replied the lad quickly. "I caught him sneaking around
my machine shop about an hour ago, and when I asked him what he was
doing he said he'd been out riding with Andy, and that they broke a
wheel. I'm glad it was only a blown-out tire," and Tom's voice had a
curious note in it.

"But there must be some mistake," insisted Mr. Foger. "Sam Snedecker
was not riding with us this evening. We have been over to
Waterfield--my son and I, and--"

"Come on, pop!" cried Andy desperately. "We must hurry home.  Mom will
be worried."

"Yes, I think she will. But I can't understand why Sam should say such
a thing. However, we are much obliged for the use of your pump, Swift,
and--"

But Andy prevented any further talk by starting the car with the
muffler open, making a great racket, and he hurriedly drove off, almost
before his father was seated, leaving Tom standing there in the road,
beside his pump and lantern.

"So," mused the young inventor, "there's some game on. Sam wasn't with
Andy, yet Andy evidently knew where Sam was, or he wouldn't have been
so anxious to choke off talk. Mr. Foger knew nothing of Sam, naturally.
But why have Andy and his father been on a midnight trip to Waterfield?"

That last question caused Tom to adopt a new line of thought.

"Waterfield," he mused. "That's where Mr. Damon lives. Mr. Damon is a
heavy depositor in the old bank. Mr. Foger is going to start a new
bank. I wonder if there's any connection there? This is getting
mysterious. I must keep my eyes open. I never expected to meet Andy and
his father to-night, any more than I expected to find Sam Snedecker
sneaking around my shop, but it's a good thing I discovered both
parties. I guess Andy must have had nervous prostration when I was
talking to his father," and Tom grinned at the thought. Then, picking
up the pump, and fastening the lantern in place, he drove Mr. Damon's
auto slowly back home.

Tom said nothing to his father or Mr. Sharp, the next morning, about
the incidents of the previous night. In the first place he could not
exactly understand them, and he wanted to devote more time to thinking
of them, before he mentioned the matter to his parent. Another reason
was that Mr. Swift was a very nervous person, and the least thing out
of the ordinary worried him. So the young inventor concluded to keep
quiet.

His first act, after going to look at the small motor, which was being
run with the larger, experimental storage battery, was to get out
pencil and paper.

"I've got to plan the electric auto now that my battery is in a fair
way to success," he said, for he noted that the one cell he had
constructed had done over twice as much mileage in proportion, as had
the small battery. "I'll soon start building the car," mused Tom, "and
then I'll enter it in the race. I must write to that touring club and
find how much time I have."

All that morning the young inventor drew plan after plan for an
electric runabout, and rejected them. Finally he threw aside paper and
pencil and exclaimed:

"It's no use. I can't think to-day. I'm dwelling too much on what
happened last night. I must clear my brain.

"I know what I'll do. I'll get in my motor-boat and take a run over to
Waterfield to see Mr. Damon. Maybe he's home by this time. Then I can
ask him what Mr. Foger wanted to see him about, if he did call."

It was a fine May morning, and Tom was soon in his boat, the Arrow,
gliding over Lake Carlopa, the waters of which sparkled in the sun. As
he speeded up his craft, the lad looked about, thinking he might catch
sight of Andy Foger, for the bully also owned a boat, called the Red
Streak and, more than once, in spite of the fact that Andy's craft was
the more powerful, Tom had beaten him in impromptu races. But there was
no sign of his rival this morning, and Tom kept on to Waterfield. He
found that Mr. Damon had not yet returned home.

"So far I've had my run for nothing," mused the youth. "Well, I might
as well spend the rest of the morning in the boat."

He swung his craft out into the lake, and headed back toward Mansburg,
intending to run up to the head of the body of water, which offered so
many attractions that beautiful morning.

As Tom passed a small dock he saw a girl just putting out in a rowboat.
The figure looked familiar and, having nothing special to do, the lad
steered over closer. His first view was confirmed, and he called out
cheerfully:

"Good morning, Miss Nestor. Going for a row?"

"Oh! Mr. Swift!" exclaimed the girl with a blush.  "I didn't hear you
coming. You startled me."

"Yes, the engine runs quite silently since I fixed it," resumed Tom.
"But where are you going?"

"I was going for a row," answered the girl, "but I have just discovered
that one of the oar locks is broken, so I am not going for a row," and
she laughed, showing her white, even teeth.

"That's too bad!" remarked the lad. "I don't suppose," he added
doubtfully, "that I could induce you to accept a motor-boat as a
substitute for a rowing craft, could I?" and he looked quizzically at
her.

"Are you asking me that as a hypothetical question?" she inquired.

"Yes," said Tom, trying not to smile.

"Well, if you are asking for information, merely, I will say that I
could be induced to make such a change," and her face was nearly as
grave as that of the young inventor's.

"What inducement would have to be used?" he asked.

"Suppose you just ask me in plain English to come and have a ride?" she
suggested.

"All right, I will!" exclaimed the youth.

"All right, then I'll come!" she retorted with a laugh, and a few
minutes later the two were in the Arrow, making a pretty picture as
they speeded up the lake.




CHAPTER VI

BUILDING THE CAR


"Well," remarked Tom to himself, about two hours later, when he had
left Mary Nestor at her dock, and was on his way home, "I feel better
than I did, and now I must do some hard thinking about my runabout. I
want to get it the right shape to make the least resistance." He began
to make some sketches when he got home, and at dinner he showed them to
his father and Mr. Sharp.  He said he had gotten an idea from looking
at the airship.

"I'm going to make the front part, or what corresponds to the
engine-hood in a gasolene car, pointed," he explained. "It will be just
like the front of the aluminum gas container of the airship, only built
of steel. In it will be a compartment for a set of batteries, and there
will be a searchlight there. From the top of some supporters in front
of the two rear seats, a slanting sheet of steel will come right down
to meet the sloping nose of the car. First I was going to have curtains
close over the top of the driver's seat, but I think a steel covering,
with a celluloid opening will be better and make less wind resistance.
I'll use leather side curtains when it rains. Under the front seats
will be a compartment for more batteries, and there will be a third
place under the rear seats, where I will also carry spare wheels and a
repair kit. The motors will be slung under the body of the car,
amidships, and there will also be room for some batteries there."

"How are you going to drive the car?" asked Mr. Sharp. "By a shaft?"

"Chain drive," explained Tom. "I can get more power that way, and it
will be more flexible under heavy loads. Of course it will be steered
in the usual way, and near the wheel will be the starting and reversing
levers, and the gear handle."

"Gears!" exclaimed the aged inventor. "Are you going to gear an
electric auto? I never heard of that. Usually the motor directly
connected is all they use."

"I'm going to have two gears on mine," decided Tom.

"That's a new idea," commented the aeronaut.

"It is," admitted the lad, "and that's why my car is going to be so
speedy. I'll make her go a hundred miles an hour, if necessary!"

"Nonsense!" exclaimed his father.

"I will!" cried the young inventor, enthusiastically. "You just wait
and see. I couldn't do it but for the gears, but by using them I'll
secure more speed, especially with the big reserve battery power I'll
have. I know I've got the right idea, and I'm going to get right to
work."

His father and Mr. Sharp were much interested, and closely examined his
sketches. In a few days Tom had made detailed drawings, and the aged
inventor looked at them critically. He had to admit that his son's
theory was right, though how it would work out in practice was yet to
be demonstrated. Mr. Swift offered some suggestions for minor changes,
as did Mr. Sharp, and the lad adopted some of them. Then, with Mr.
Jackson to help him, work was started on constructing the car.

Certain parts of it could be better purchased in the open market
instead of being manufactured in Mr. Swift's shop, and thus Tom was
able to get his new invention into some sort of shape sooner than would
otherwise have been the case. He also started making the batteries,
many of which would be needed.

Gradually the car began to take form on the floor of Tom's shop. It was
rather a curious looking affair, the sharp forward part making it
appear like some engine of war, or a projectile for some monster gun.
But Tom cared little for looks. Speed, strength and ease of control
were the chief features the lad aimed at, and he incorporated many new
ideas into his electric car.

He was busy in the shop, one morning, when, above the noise caused by
filing a piece of steel he heard some one exclaim:

"Bless my gizzard! If you aren't as busy as ever!"

"Mr. Damon!" cried Tom in delight. "When did you get back?"

"Last night," replied the eccentric man. "My wife and I stayed longer
than we meant to. And whom do you think we met when we were off on our
little trip?"

"Some of the Happy Harry gang?"

"Oh no. You'd never guess, so I'll tell you. It was Captain Weston."

"Indeed! And how has he been since he went in the submarine with us,
and helped recover the gold from the wreck?"

"Very well. The first thing he said to me was: 'How is Tom Swift and
his father, if I may be permitted to ask?'"

"Ha! Ha!" laughed the lad, at the recollection of the odd sea captain,
who generally tagged on an apologetic expression to most of his remarks.

"He was getting ready to take part in some South American revolution,"
went on Mr. Damon. "He used most of his money that he got from the
wreck to help finance their cause."

"I must tell Mr. Sharp," went on the lad. "He'll be interested."

"Anything new since I've been away?" asked the odd man. "Bless my shoe
laces, but I'm glad to get back!"

Tom told of the prospect of a new bank being started, and of Sam's
midnight visit, as well as the encounter with Mr. Foger and Andy.

"I went over to see what Mr. Foger wanted of you," went on the young
inventor, "but you weren't home. Did he call?"

"The servant said he had been there, not once, but several times,"
remarked Mr. Damon. "That reminds me. He left a note for me, and I
haven't read it yet. I'll do so now."

He tore open the letter, and hastily perused the contents.

"Ha!" he exclaimed. "So that's what he wanted to see me about!"

"What?" inquired Tom, with the privilege of an old friend.

"Mr. Foger says he's going to start a new bank, and he wants me to
withdraw my deposit from the old one, and put it in his institution.
Says he'll pay me bigger interest. And he adds that some of the old
employees have gone with him."

"I hope you're not going to change," spoke Tom, thinking of his chum,
Ned.

"Indeed I'm not. The old bank is good enough for me. By the way,
doesn't a friend of yours work there?"

"Yes, Ned Newton. I'm wondering how he'll be affected?"

"Don't you worry!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "Bless my check book!  I'll
speak to Pendergast about your friend. Maybe there'll be a chance to
advance him further. I've got some mortgages falling due pretty soon,
and I'll deposit the money from them in the old bank. Then we'll see
what we can do about Ned."

"They'll make you a bank director, if you keep on putting in money,"
remarked our hero, with a smile.

"Not much they won't!" was the quick answer.

"Bless my stocks and bonds! I've got trouble enough without becoming a
bank director. My doctor says my liver is out of order again, and I've
got to eat a lemon every morning before breakfast."

"Eat a lemon?"

"Well, drink the juice! It's the same thing. But how is the electric
runabout coming on?"

"Pretty good."

"Have you entered it in the races yet?"

"No, but I've written for information. I have until September to finish
it. The races take place then."

"Let's see; they're on Long Island; aren't they? How do you calculate
to do; run from here to there?"

"No, Dad still has the cottage he rented when we built the submarine
and I think I'll make that my headquarters during the race. It's easy
to run from there over to the Long Island track.  They're building a
new one, especially for the occasion.

"Well, I hope you win the prize. I must go to town now, as I have to
attend to some business. I don't s'pose you want to come in my auto.
I'm pretty sure something will break before I get there, and I'd like
to have you along to fix it."

"Sorry, but I'm afraid I can't go," replied the lad. "I must get this
car done, and then I've got to start on the batteries."

Mr. Damon rather reluctantly went off alone, looking anxiously at his
car, for the machine got out of order on every trip he took.

It was a few days after this that Tom received a call from Ned one
evening. The bank employee's face wore a happy smile.

"What's the matter; some one left you a fortune?" asked Tom.

"Pretty nearly as good. I've got a better position."

"What? Have you left the old bank, and gone to the new one?"

"No, I'm still in the same bank, but I'm one of the two cashiers now.
Mr. Foger took several of the old employees when he opened his new
bank, and that left vacancies. I was promoted, and so were one or two
others. Mr. Damon spoke a good word for me."

"That's fine! He's a friend worth having."

"That's right. Your father also recommended me. But how are things with
you? Has Andy made any more trouble?"

"No, and I don't believe he will. I guess he'll steer clear of me."

But Tom was soon to learn he was mistaken.




CHAPTER VII

TOM IS CAPTURED


Meanwhile the young inventor, aided by his father, Mr. Sharp and Garret
Jackson, the engineer, worked hard over his new car, and the powerful
batteries. A month passed, and such was the progress made that Tom felt
justified in making formal entry of his vehicle for the races to be
held by the Touring Club of America.

He paid a contingent fee and was listed as one of the competitors. As
is usual in an affair of this kind, the promoters of it desired
publicity, and they sought it through the papers.

Consequently each new entrant's name was published. In addition
something was said about his previous achievements in the speed line.

No sooner was the name of Tom Swift received by the officials of the
club, than it was at once recalled that young Swift had had a prominent
part in the airship Red Cloud, and the submarine Advance. This gave an
enterprising reporter a chance for a "special" for the Sunday
supplement of a New York newspaper.

Tom, it was stated, was building a car which would practically
annihilate distance and time, and there were many weird pictures,
showing him flying along without touching the ground, in a car, the
pictorial construction of which was at once fearful and wonderful.

Tom and his friends laughed at the yarn, at first, but it soon had
undesirable results. The young inventor had desired to keep secret the
fact that he was building a new electric vehicle, and a novel storage
battery, but the article in the paper aroused considerable interest.
Many persons came a long distance, hoping for a sight of the wonderful
car, as pictured in the Sunday supplement, but they had to be denied.
The news, thus leaking out, kept the Swift shops almost constantly
besieged by many curious ones, who sought, by various means, to gain
admission.  Finally Tom and his father, after posting large signs,
warning persons to keep away, added others to the effect that
undesirable visitors might find themselves unexpectedly shocked by
electricity, if they ventured too close. This had the desired effect,
though the wires which were strung about carried such a mild charge
that it would not have harmed a child. Then the only bothersome
characters were the boys of the town, and, fearless and careless lads,
they persisted in hanging around the Swift homestead, in the hope of
seeing Tom dash away at the rate of five hundred miles an hour, which
one enthusiastic writer predicted he would do.

"I've got a plan!" exclaimed Tom one day when the boys had been
particularly troublesome.

"What is it?" asked his father.

"We'll hire Eradicate Sampson to stand guard with a bucket of
whitewash. He'll keep the boys away."

The plan was put into operation, and Eradicate and his mule, Boomerang,
were installed on the premises.

"Deed an' Ah'll keep dem lads away," promised the colored man.  "Ah'll
splash white stuff all ober 'em, if dey comes traipsin' around me."

He was as good as his word, and, when one or two lads had received a
dose of the stuff, which punishment was followed by more severe from
home, for having gotten their clothes soiled, the nuisance ceased, to a
certain extent. Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey were two who received a
liberal sprinkling of the lime, and they vowed vengeance on Tom.

"And Andy Foger will help us, too," added Sam, as he withdrew, after an
encounter with Eradicate.

"Doan't let dat worry yo', Mistah Swift!" exclaimed the darkey.  "Jest
let dat low-down-good-fo-nuffin' Andy Foger come 'round me, an' Ah'll
make him t'ink he's de inside ob a chicken coop, dat's what Ah will."

Perhaps Andy heard of this, and kept away. In the meanwhile Tom kept on
perfecting his car and battery. From the club secretary he learned that
a number of inventors were working on electric cars, and there promised
to be many of the speedy vehicles in the race.

After considerable labor Tom had succeeded in getting together one set
of the batteries. He had them completed one afternoon, and wanted to
give them a test that night. But, when he went to his father's chemical
laboratory for a certain powder, which he needed to use in the battery
solution, he found there was none.

"I'll have to ride in to Mansburg for some," he decided. "I'll go after
supper, on my motor-cycle, and test the battery to-night."

The young inventor left his house immediately after the evening meal.
Along the road toward Mansburg he speeded, and, as he came to the foot
of a hill, where once Andy Foger had put a big tree, hoping Tom would
run into it and be injured, the youth recalled that circumstance.

"Andy has been keeping out of my way lately," mused Tom. "I wonder if
he's up to any mischief? I don't like the way Sam Snedecker is hanging
around the shop, either. It looks as if they were plotting something.
But I guess Eradicate and his pail of whitewash will scare them off."

Tom got the powdered chemical he wanted in the drug store, and, after
refreshing himself with some ice cream soda, he started back. As he
rode along through the streets of the town he kept a lookout, and those
of you who know how fond the lad was of a certain young lady, do not
need to be told for whom he was looking. But he did not see her, and
soon turned into the main highway leading to Shopton.

It was dark when he reached the hill, where once he had been so near an
accident, and he slowed up as he coasted down it, using the brake at
intervals.

Tom got safely to the bottom of the declivity, and was about to turn on
the power of his machine, when, from the bushes that lined either side
of the roadway, several figures sprang suddenly. They ranged themselves
across the road, and one cried: "Halt!" in tones that were meant to be
stern, but which seemed to Tom, to tremble somewhat. The young inventor
was so surprised that he did not open the gasolene throttle, nor switch
on his spark. As a consequence his motor-cycle lost momentum, and he
had to take one foot from the pedal and touch the ground, to prevent
himself from toppling over.

"Hold on there!" cried another voice. "We've got you where we want you,
now! Hold on! Don't go!"

"I wasn't going to go," responded Tom calmly, trying to recognize the
voice, which seemed to be unnatural. "What do you want, and who are
you?"

"Never mind who we are. We want you and we've got you! Get off that
wheel!"

"I don't see why I should!" exclaimed Tom, and he suddenly shifted his
handle bars, so as to flash the bright headlight he carried, upon the
circle of dark figures that opposed his progress. As the light flashed
on them he was surprised to see that all the figures wore masks over
their faces.

Tom started. Was this the Happy Harry gang after him again? He hoped
not, yet the fact that the persons had on masks made the hold-up have
an ugly look. Once more Tom flashed the light on the throng. There were
exclamations of dismay.

"Douse that glim, somebody!" called a sharp voice, which Tom could not
recognize.

A stone came whizzing through the air, from some one in the crowd.
There was a smashing of glass as it hit the lantern, and the road was
plunged in darkness. Tom tried to throw one leg over the saddle, and
let down the supporting stand from the rear wheel, so the motor-cycle
would remain upright without him holding it. He determined to have
revenge for that act of vandalism in breaking his lamp.

But, just as he was free of the seat, he was surrounded by a dozen
persons, and several hands were laid on him.

"We've got you now!" some one fairly hissed in his ear. "Come along,
and get what's coming to you!"

Tom tried to fight, but he was overpowered by numbers and, a little
later, was dragged off into the woods in the darkness by the masked
figures. His arms were securely bound with ropes, and a handkerchief
was tied over his eyes. Tom Swift was a prisoner.




CHAPTER VIII

A BLINDING FLASH


Stumbling on through the dark woods, led by his captors, Tom tried to
pierce the gloom and identify the persons who had firm grips on either
side of him. But it was useless. A little light sifted down from the
starlit sky above, but it was not sufficient. The young inventor was
beginning to think, after all, that he had fallen into the hands of the
Happy Harry gang, and he knew that if this was so he need expect no
mercy.

But two things were against this belief. One was that the principal
members of the gang were still in jail, or at least they were supposed
to be, and another was that there were too many of the captors. Happy
Harry's crowd never numbered so many.

"Maybe they're highwaymen," thought our hero, as he was dragged along
"But that can't be," he reasoned further. "If they wanted to rob me
they'd have done it back there in the road, and not brought me off here
in the woods. Besides, I haven't anything for them to steal."

Suddenly Tom stumbled over a projecting root, and nearly fell, dragging
along with him the person who had hold of his left arm.

"Look out there! What's the matter with you?" exclaimed one of the
throng quickly, and at the sound of the voice Tom started.

"Andy Foger!" cried the young inventor, as he recovered himself, for he
had recognized the voice of the red-haired bully.  "What do you mean by
holding me up in this way?" he demanded.

"Quiet!" urged a voice in his ear, and the tones were unfamiliar.
"Mention no names!"

"I'm on to your game!" retorted Tom. "I know you're here, Andy, and Sam
and Pete; and Jack Reynolds and Sid Holton," and he named two rather
loose-charactered lads, who were often in the company of Andy and his
cronies. "You'd better quit this nonsense," Tom went on. "I'll cause
the arrest of all of you if you make trouble for me. I know who you are
now!"

"You think you do," answered the voice in his ear, and the young
inventor concluded that it must be some lad whom he did not know. "Nor
is this nonsense," the other went on. "You are about to receive the
punishment due you."

Our hero did not answer, but he was doing some hard thinking.  He
wondered why Andy and his crowd had captured him.

Suddenly the blackness of the woods was illuminated by the fitful gleam
of a distant fire. Tom could see more plainly now, and he managed to
count about ten dusky figures hurrying along, four being close to him,
to prevent his escape, and the others running on ahead. The light
became stronger, and, a moment later the prisoner and his captors
emerged into a little clearing, where a fire was burning. Two figures,
masked with black cloth, as were all in the crowd, stood about the
blaze, putting on sticks of wood.

"Did you get him?" asked one of these figures eagerly.

"Yes, they got me, Sam Snedecker," answered Tom quickly, recognizing
Sam's tones. "And they'll wish they hadn't before I'm done with them."

"Quiet!" ordered an unknown voice. "Members of the Deep Forest Throng,
the prisoner is here!" the lad went on.

"'Tis well, bind the captive to the sacrificial tree," was the response
from some one in the crowd.

Tom laughed. He was at ease now, for he recognized that those who had
taken him prisoner were all lads of Andy's character.  Most of them
were Shopton youths, but some, evidently, were strangers in town. Tom
felt he had little to fear.

"Bring him over here," ordered one, and Tom cried out:

"You wouldn't be giving those orders, Andy Foger, if my arms weren't
tied. And if you'll untie me, I'll fight any two of you at once,"
offered the young inventor fiercely, for he hated the humiliation to
which he was being subjected.

"Don't do it! Don't untie him!" begged some one.

"No danger, they won't. They're afraid to, Pete Bailey," replied Tom
quickly, for he had recognized the voice of the other one of Andy's
particular cronies.

"Aw, he knows who we are," whispered Sam, but not so low but that our
hero heard him.

"No matter," was Andy's retort. "Let's go ahead with it. Tie him to
that tree."

It was useless for Tom to struggle. He was bound too tightly by the
rope, and the crowd was too many for him. In a few minutes he was
securely fastened to a tree, not far from the camp-fire, which was
replenished from time to time.

"Now for the judgment!" called one of the masked lads, in what he meant
to be a sepulchral tone. "What is the charge against the prisoner?
Brother Number One of the Deep Forest Throng, what is your accusation?"

"He's a regular snob, that's what's the trouble,"  answered Andy
Foger,  though whether he was "Brother Number One," did not appear.
"He's too fresh and--and--"

"I'll make you wish you felt fresh when I get hold of you, Andy,"
murmured Tom.

"Quiet!" cried a tall lad. "What's the next charge?"

"He keeps an old colored man on guard at his place," was the answer,
and Tom had no difficulty in recognizing the voice of Sid Holton. "The
coon throws whitewash all over us. I got some of it."

"You wouldn't have, if you'd minded your own business," retorted Tom.
"It served you right!"

"What is the verdict on the prisoner?" asked one who seemed to be the
leader.

"I say let's tar and feather him!" cried Andy suddenly.  "There's a
barrel of tar back in the woods here, and we can get some feathers from
a chicken coop. That would make him so he wouldn't be so uppish, I
guess!"

"That's right! Tar and feathers!" exclaimed several.

Our hero's heart sank. He was not afraid, but he did not relish the
indignity that was proposed. He resolved to fight to the last ounce of
his strength against the masked lads.

"Can we get a kettle to heat the tar in?" asked some one.

"We'll find one," answered Sam Snedecker. "Come on, let's do it. You'll
look pretty, Tom Swift, when we're through with you," he exulted.

Tom did not answer, but there was fierce anger in his heart.  The tar
and feather proposal seemed to meet with general favor.

"Members of the Deep Forest Throng, we will hold a consultation,"
proposed the leader, in his assumed deep voice.  "Come over here, to
one side. Brother Number Six, guard the prisoner well."

"There ain't no need to," answered a lad who had been instructed to
mount guard over Tom. "He's tied so tight he can't move. I want to hear
what you say."

"Very well then," assented the leader,  "But look to his bonds."

The lad made a hasty examination of the ropes binding the young
inventor to the tree, and Tom was glad that the examination was a hasty
one. For he feared the guard might discover that one hand had been
worked nearly free. The young inventor had done this while he leered at
his captors.

Tom was not going to submit tamely to the nonsense, and from the moment
he had been tied, he had been trying to get loose. He had nearly
succeeded in freeing one hand when the crowd of masked boys moved off
to one side, where they presently began to talk in excited whispers.

"I wonder how they came to catch me," thought the prisoner, as he
worked feverishly to further loosen the ropes. "This looks as if it was
a put-up job, with the masks, and everything."  Later he learned that
the idea was the outcome of a proposal of one of the new arrivals in
town. He had organized the "Deep Forest Throng," as a sort of secret
society, and Andy and his cronies had been induced to join. It was
Andy's proposal to capture Tom, though, and, having seen him depart for
Mansburg on his motor-cycle, and knowing that he would return along a
road that ran near the woods where the Throng met, suggested that they
take Tom captive. The idea was enthusiastically received, and Andy and
his cronies thought they saw a chance to be revenged.

Tom, while he picked at the ropes, listened to what the boys were
saying. He heard frequent mention of tar and feathers, and began to
believe, that unless he could get free, while they were off there
consulting, he might be forced to submit to the humiliating ordeal.

He managed to get one hand comparatively free, so that he could move it
about, but then he struck several hard knots, and could make no further
progress. The conference seemed on the point of breaking up.

"One of you go for a big kettle to boil the tar in," ordered the
leader, "and the rest of you dig up some feathers."

"I must get loose!" thought Tom desperately. "If they try to tar and
feather me it will be a risky business. I've got to get loose! They may
burn me severely!"

But, though he tried with all his strength, the ropes would not loosen
another bit. He had one hand free, and that was all. The crowd was
moving back toward him.

"My knife!" thought the captive quickly. "If I can reach that in my
pocket I can cut the ropes! Once I get loose I'll fight the whole
crowd!"

He managed to get his free hand into his pocket. His fingers touched
something. It was not his knife, and, for a moment he felt a pang of
disappointment. Then, as he realized what it was that he had grasped, a
new idea came to him.

"This will be better than the knife!" he thought exultantly.  The crowd
of lads was now surrounding him, some distance from the fire, which
burned in front of the captive.

"Sentence has been passed upon you," remarked the leader.  "Prepare to
meet thy doom! Get the materials, brothers!"

"One moment!" called Tom, for he wanted the crowd all present to
witness what he was about to do. "I'll give you one chance to let me go
peaceably. If you don't--"

"Well, what will you do?" demanded Andy sneeringly, as he pulled his
mask further over his face. "I guess you won't do anything, Tom Swift."

"I'll give you one chance to let me go, and I'll agree to say nothing
about this joke," went on Tom. "If you don't I'll blow this place up!"

For a moment there was a silence.

"Ha! Ha! Ho! Ho!" laughed Sam Snedecker. "Listen to him! He'll blow the
place up! I'd like to see you do it! You can't get loose in the first
place, and you haven't anything to blow it up with in the second. I'd
like to see you do it; hey, fellers?"

"Sure," came the answering chorus.

"Would you?" asked Tom quickly. "Then watch. Stand back if you don't
want to get hurt, and remember that I gave you a chance to let me go!"

Tom made a rapid motion with the hand he had gotten loose. He threw
something toward the blazing fire, which was now burning well.
Something white sailed through the air, and fell amid the hot embers.

There was a moment's pause, and then a blinding flash of blue fire
lighted up the woods, and a dull rumble, as when gun-powder is lighted
in the open followed. A great cloud of white smoke arose, as the vivid
blue glare died away, and it seemed as if a great wind swept over the
place. Several of the masked lads were knocked down by the explosion,
and when the rumble died away, and deep blackness succeeded the intense
blue light, there came cries of pain and terror. The fire had been
scattered, and extinguished by the explosion which Tom, though still
bound to the tree had caused to happen in the midst of the Deep Forest
Throng. Then, as the smoke rolled away, Andy Foger cried:

"Come on, fellows! Something's happened. I guess a volcano blew up!"




CHAPTER IX

TOM IS RESCUED


The Deep Forest Throng needed no urging to flee from the place of the
mysterious explosion. Their prisoner, helpless as he had seemed, had
proved too much for them. Slipping and stumbling along in the darkness,
the masked lads had but one thought--to get away before they saw more
of that blue fire, and the force of the concussion.

"Gee! My eyebrows are all singed off!" cried Sam Snedecker, as he tore
loose his mask which had been rent in the explosion, and felt of his
face.

"And my hands are burned," added Pete Bailey. "I stood closer to the
fire than any of you."

"You did not! I got the worst of it!" cried Andy. "I was knocked down
by the explosion, and I'll bet I'm hurt somewhere. I guess--Oh! Help!
I'm falling in a mud hole!"

There was a splash, and the bully disappeared from the sight of his
companions who, now that the moon had risen, could better see to flee
from their prisoner.

"Help me out, somebody!" pleaded Andy. "I'm in a mud hole!"

They pulled him out, a sorry looking sight, and the red-haired lad,
whose locks were now black with muck, began to lament his lot.

"Dry up!" commanded Sid Holton. "It's all your fault, for proposing
such a fool trick as capturing Tom Swift. We might have known he would
get the best of us."

"What was that stuff he used, anyhow?" asked Cecil Hedden, the lad
responsible for the organization of the Deep Forest Throng.  "He must
be a wonder. Does he do sleight-of-hand tricks?"

"He does all sorts of tricks," replied Pete Bailey, feeling of a big
lump on his head, caused by falling on a stone in the mad rush. "I
guess we were chumps to tackle him. He must have put some kind of
chemical in the fire, to make it blow up."

"Or else he summoned his airship by wireless, and had that balloonist,
Mr. Sharp, drop a bomb in the blaze," suggested another lad.

"But how could he do anything? Wasn't he tied fast to that tree?" asked
Cecil, the leader.

"You never know when you've got Tom Swift tied," declared Jack
Reynolds. "You think you've got him, and you haven't. He's too slick
for us. It's Andy's fault, for proposing to capture him."

"That's right! Blame it all on me," whined the squint-eyed bully. "You
was just as anxious as I was to tar and feather him."

"Well, we didn't do it," commented Pete Bailey, dryly. "I s'pose he's
loose now, laughin' at us. Gee, but that was an explosion though! It's
a wonder some of us weren't killed! I guess I've had enough of this
Deep Forest Throng business. No more for mine."

"Aw, don't be afraid," urged Cecil. "The next time we get him we'll be
on our guard."

"You'll never catch Tom Swift again," predicted Pete.

"I'll go back now to where he is, if you will," agreed Cecil, who was
older than the others.

"Not much!" cried Pete. "I've had enough."

This seemed to be the sentiment of all. Away they stumbled through the
woods, and, emerging on the road, scattered to their several homes, not
one but who suffered from slight burns, contusions, torn and muddy
clothes or injured feelings as the outcome of the "joke" on the young
inventor.

But our hero was not yet free from the bonds of his enemies.  When they
scattered and ran, after the vivid blue light, and the dull explosion,
which, being unconfined, did no real damage, Tom was still fast to the
tree. As his eyes became accustomed to the semi-darkness that followed
the glare, he remarked:

"Well, I don't know that I'm much better off. I gave those fellows a
good scare, but I'm not loose. But I can work to better advantage now."

Once more he resumed the effort to free himself, but in spite of the
crude manner in which the knots had been made, the lad could not get
loose. The more he pulled and tugged the tighter they seemed to become.

"This is getting serious," Tom mused. "If I could only reach my knife I
could cut them, but it's in my pocket on the other side, and that
bond's fast. Guess I'll have to stay here all night.  Maybe I'd better
call for help, but--"

His words, spoken half aloud, were suddenly interrupted by a crash in
the underbrush. Somebody was approaching. At first Tom thought it was
Andy and his cronies coming back, but a voice that called a moment
later proved that this was not so.

"Is any one here?" shouted a man. "Any one hurt? What was that fire and
explosion?"

"I'm here," replied Tom. "I'm not hurt exactly, but I'm tied to a tree.
I'll be much obliged if you'll loosen me."

"Who are you?"

"Tom Swift. Is that you, Mr. Mason?"

"Yes. By jinks! I never expected to find you here, Tom. Over this way,
men," he added calling aloud. "I've found him; it's Tom Swift."

There was the flicker of several lanterns amid the trees, and soon a
number of men had joined Mr. Mason, and surrounded Tom.  They were
farmers living in the neighborhood.

"What in the name o' Tunket happened?" asked one. "Did you get hit by a
meteor or a comet? Who tied you up; highwaymen?"

"Cut him loose first, and ask questions afterward," suggested Mr. Mason.

"Yes," added Tom, with a laugh, "I wish you would. I'm beginning to
feel cramped."

With their knives, the farmers quickly cut the ropes, and some of them
rubbed the arms of the lad to restore the circulation.

"What was it--highwaymen?" asked a man, unable to longer restrain his
curiosity. "Did they rob you?"

"No, it wasn't highwaymen," replied the youth. "It was a trick of some
boys I know," and to Tom's credit be it said that he did not mention
their names. "They did it for a joke," he added.

"Boys' trick? Joke?" queried Mr. Mason. "Pretty queer sort of a joke, I
think. They ought to be arrested."

"Oh, I fancy I gave them what was coming to them," went on the young
inventor.

"Did they try to blow ye up, too?" asked Mr. Hertford. "What in th'
name of Tunket was that blue light, and that explosion? I heard it an'
saw it way over to my house."

"So did I," remarked Mr. Mason, and several others said the same thing.
"We thought a meteor had fallen," he continued, "and we got together to
make an investigation."

"It's a good thing for me you did," admitted Tom, "or I might have had
to stay here all night."

"But was it a meteor?" insisted Mr. Hertford.

"No," replied the lad, "I did it."

"You?"

"Yes. You see after they tied me I found I could get one hand free. I
reached in my pocket for my knife, but instead of it I managed to get
hold of a package of powder I had."

"Gunpowder?" asked Mr. Mason.

"No, a chemical powder I use in an electrical battery. The powder
explodes in fire, and makes quite a blue flash, and a lot of smoke, but
it isn't very dangerous, otherwise I wouldn't have used it. When the
boys were some distance away from the fire, I threw the powder in the
blaze. It went off in a moment, and--"

"I guess they run some; didn't they?" asked Mr. Mason with a laugh.

"They certainly did," agreed Tom.




CHAPTER X

TOM HAS A FALL


The young inventor told more details of his adventure in the woods,
but, though the farmers questioned him closely, he would not give a
single name of his assailants.

"But I should think you'd want to have them punished," remarked Mr.
Mason.

"I'll attend to that part later," answered Tom. "Besides, most of them
didn't know what they were doing. They were led on by one or two. No,
I'll fight my own battles. But I wish you'd lend me a lantern long
enough to find my motor-cycle. The moon doesn't give much light in the
woods, and those fellows may have hidden my machine."

Mr. Mason and his companions readily agreed to accompany Tom on a
search for his wheel. It was found just where he had dismounted from it
in the road. Andy and his cronies had evidently had enough of their
encounter with our hero, and did not dare to annoy him further.

"Do you think you can ride home?" asked one of the farmers of the lad,
when he had ascertained that his machine was in running order.

"Well, it's risky without my lantern," answered Tom. "They smashed that
for me. But I guess I can manage."

"No, you can't!" insisted Mr. Mason. "You're stiff from being tied up;
and you can't ride. Now you just wheel that contraption over to my
place, and I'll hitch up and take you home. It isn't far."

"Oh, I couldn't think of troubling you," declared Tom. At the same time
he felt that he was in no condition to ride.

"It's no trouble at all," insisted Mr. Mason. "I guess your father and
I are good enough friends to allow me to have my way.  You can come
over and get your choo-choo bicycle in the morning."

A little later Tom was being rapidly driven toward his home, where he
found his father and Mrs. Baggert, to say nothing of Mr. Sharp,
somewhat alarmed over his absence, as it was getting late.  The youth
told as much of his adventure as he thought would not alarm his father,
making a sort of joke of it, and, later, related all the details to the
balloonist.

"We'll have to get after Andy again," declared the aeronaut.  "He needs
another toning down."

"Yes, similar to the one he got when we nearly ran away with his
automobile, by catching the airship anchor on it," added Tom with a
laugh. "But I fancy Andy will steer clear of me for a while. I'm sorry
I had to use up that chemical powder, though.  Now I can't start my
battery until to-morrow." But the next day Tom made up for lost time,
by working from early until late. He went over to Mr. Mason's, got his
motor-cycle, procured some more of the chemical, and soon had his
storage battery in running order. Then he arranged for a more severe
test, and while that was going on he worked at completing the body of
the electric runabout. The vehicle was beginning to look like a car,
though it was not of the regulation pattern.

For the next week Tom was very busy, so occupied, in fact, that he
scarcely took time for his meals, which caused Mrs. Baggert no little
worriment, for she was a housekeeper who liked to see others enjoy her
cooking.

"Well, Tom, how are you coming on?" asked his father one night, as they
sat on the porch, Mr. Sharp with them.

"Pretty well, Dad," was the answer of the young inventor. "I'll put the
wheels on to-morrow, and then set the batteries. I've got the motor all
finished; and all I'll have to do will be to connect it up, and then
I'll be ready for a trial on the road."

"And you still think you'll beat all records?"

"I'm pretty sure of it, Dad. You see the amperage will be exceptionally
high, and my batteries will have a large amount of reserve, with little
internal resistance. But do you know I'm so tired I can hardly think.
It's more of a job than I thought it would be."

Tom, a little later, strolled down the road. As he turned back toward
the house and walked up the shrubbery lined path he heard a noise.

"Some one's hiding in there!" thought the lad, and he darted to an
opening in the hedge to reach the other side. As he did so he saw a
figure running away. Whether it was a man or a boy he could not tell in
the darkness.

"Hold on there!" cried the young inventor, but, naturally, the fleeing
one did not stop. Tom began to sprint, and as it was slightly down
hill, he made good time. The figure ahead of him was running well, too,
but Tom who could see better, now that he was out from under the trees,
noticed that he was gaining. The fleeing one came to a little brook,
and hesitated a moment before leaping across. This enabled Tom to catch
up, and he made a grab for the figure, just as the man or boy sprang
across the little stream.

Tom missed his grip, but he was not going to give up. He scarcely
slackened his speed, but, with the momentum he had acquired in racing
down the hill, he, too, leaped across the brook. As he landed on the
other side he made another grab for the figure, a man, as Tom could now
see, but he could make out no features, as the person's hat was pulled
down over his face.

"I've got you now!" cried Tom exultantly, reaching out his hand. His
fingers clutched something, but the next instant the young inventor
went sprawling. The other had put out his foot, and tripped him neatly
and, Tom throwing out his hands to save himself in the fall that was
inevitable, went splashing into the brook at full length. The unknown,
pausing a moment to view what he had done, turned quickly and raced off
in the darkness.




CHAPTER XI

CROSSED WIRES


More surprised than hurt, and with a feeling of chagrin and anger at
the trick which had been played on him, Tom managed to scramble out of
the brook. The water was not deep, but he had splashed in with such
force that he was wet all over. And, as he got up, the water dripping
from his clothes, the lad was conscious of a pain in his head. He put
up his hand, and found that contact with a stone had raised a large
lump on his forehead. It was as big as a hen's egg.

"Humph! I'll be a pretty sight to-morrow," murmured Tom. "I wonder who
that fellow was, anyhow, and what he wanted? He tripped me neatly
enough, whoever he was. I've a good notion to keep on after him."

Then, as he realized what a start the fleeing one had, the young
inventor knew that it would be fruitless to renew the chase. Slowly he
ascended the sloping bank, and started for home.  As he did so he
realized that he had, clasped in his fingers, something he had grabbed
from the person he was pursuing just before his unlucky tumble.

"It's part of his watch chain!" exclaimed Tom, as he felt of the
article. "I must have ripped it loose when I fell. Wonder what it is?
Evidently some sort of a charm. Maybe it will be a clue."  He tried to
discern of what style it was, but in the dark woods this was
impossible. Then the lad tried to strike a match, but those in his
pocket had become wet from his unexpected bath.  "I'll have to wait
until I get home," he went on, and he hastened his steps, for he was
anxious to see what he had torn loose from the person who appeared to
be spying on him.

"Why Tom, what's the matter?" exclaimed Mrs. Baggert, when he entered
the kitchen, dripping water at every step. "Is it raining outside? I
didn't hear any storm."

"It was raining where I was," replied Tom angrily. "I fell in the
brook. It was so hot I thought I'd cool off."

"With your best suit on!" ejaculated the housekeeper.

"It isn't my best," retorted the lad. "But I went in before I thought.
It was an accident; I fell," he added, lest Mrs. Baggert take his
joking remarks seriously. He did not want to tell her of the chase.

The chief concern of the lad now was to look at the charm and, as soon
as Mrs. Baggert's attention was attracted elsewhere, Tom glanced at the
object he still held tightly clenched in his hand.  As the light from
the kitchen fell upon it he could hardly repress an exclamation of
astonishment.

For the charm that he held in his hand was one he had seen before
dangling from the watch chain of Addison Berg, the agent for Bentley &
Eagert, submarine boat builders, which firm had, as told in "Tom Swift
and His Submarine," tried unsuccessfully to secure the gold treasure
from the sunken wreck. Berg and his associates had even gone so far as
to try to disable the Advance, the boat of Tom and his father, by
ramming her when deep down under the ocean, but Mr. Swift's use of an
electric cannon had broken the steering gear of the Wonder, the rival
craft, and from that time on Tom and his friends had a clear field to
search for the bullion held fast in the hold of the Boldero. "Addison
Berg," murmured Tom, as he looked at the watch charm. "What can he be
doing in this neighborhood? Hiding, too, as if he wanted to overhear
something. That's the way he did when we were building our submarine,
and now he's up to the same trick when I'm constructing my electric
car. I'm sure this charm is his. It is such a peculiar design that I'm
positive I can't be mistaken. I thought, when I was chasing after him,
that it would turn out to be Andy Foger, or some of the boys, but it
was too big for them.  Addison Berg, eh? What can he be doing around
here? I must not tell Dad, or he'd worry himself sick. But I must be on
my guard."

Tom examined the charm closely. It was a compass, but made in an odd
form, and was much ornamented.

The young inventor had noticed it on several occasions when he had been
in conversation with Mr. Berg previous to the attempt on the part of
the owners of the rival submarine to wreck Tom's boat. He felt that he
could not be mistaken in identifying the charm.

"Berg was afraid I'd catch him, and ask for an explanation that would
have been awkward to make," thought the lad, as he turned the charm
over in his hand. "That's why he tripped me up. But I'll get at the
bottom of this yet. Maybe he wants to steal my ideas for an electric
car."

Tom's musings were suddenly interrupted by Mrs. Baggert.

"I hope you're not going to stand there all night," she said, with a
laugh. "You're in the middle of a puddle now, but when you get over
dreaming I'd like to mop it up."

"All right," agreed the young inventor, coming to himself suddenly.
"Guess I'd better go get some dry clothes on."

"You'd better go to bed," advised Mrs. Baggert. "That's where your
father and Mr. Sharp are. It's late."

The more Tom thought over the strange occurrence the more it puzzled
him. He mused over the presence of Berg as he went about his work the
next day, for that it was the agent whom he had pursued he felt
positive.

"But I can't figure out why he was hanging around here," mused Tom.

Then, as he found that his thoughts over the matter were interfering
with his work, he resolutely put them from him, and threw himself
energetically into the labor of completing his electric car. The new
batteries, he found, were working well, and in the next two days he had
constructed several more, joining them so as to get the combined effect.

It was the afternoon of the third day from Tom's unexpected fall into
the brook that the young inventor decided on the first important test
of his new device. He was going to try the motor, running it with his
storage battery. Some of the connections were already in place, the
wires being fastened to the side of the shop, where they were attached
to switches. Tom did not go over these, taking it for granted that they
were all right. He soon had the motor, which he was to install in his
car, wired to the battery, and then he attached a gauge, to ascertain,
by comparison, how many miles he could hope to travel on one charging
of the storage battery.

"Guess I'll call Dad and Mr. Sharp in to see how it works, before I
turn on the current," he said to himself. He was about to summon his
parent and the aeronaut from an adjoining shop, where they were working
over a new form of dynamo, when the lad caught sight of the watch charm
he had left on his desk, in plain sight.

"Better put that away," he remarked. "Dad or Mr. Sharp might see it,
and ask questions. Then I'd have to explain, and I don't want to, not
until I get further toward the bottom of this thing."

He put the charm away, and then summoned his father and the balloonist.

"You're going to see a fine experiment," declared Tom. "I'm going to
turn on the full strength of my battery."

"Are you sure it's all right, Tom?" asked his father. "You can't be too
careful when you're dealing with electricity of high voltage, and great
ampere strength.

"Oh, it's all right, Dad," his son assured him "Now watch my motor hum."

He walked over to a big copper switch, and grasped the black rubber
handle to pull it over which would send the current from the storage
battery into the combination of wheels and gears that he hoped,
ultimately, would propel his electric automobile along the highways, or
on a track, at the rate of a hundred miles an hour.

"Here she goes!" cried Tom. For an instant he hesitated and then pulled
the switch. At the same time his hand rested on another wire, stretched
across a bench.

No sooner had the switch closed than there was a blinding flash, a
report as of a gun being fired, and Tom's body seemed to straighten
out. Then a blue flame appeared to encircle him and he dropped to the
floor of the shop, an inert mass.

"He's killed!" cried Mr. Swift, springing forward.

"Careful!" cautioned the balloonist. "He's been shocked! Don't touch
him until I turn off the current!"  As he pulled out the switch, the
aeronaut gave a glance at the apparatus.

"There's something wrong here!" he cried. "The wires have been crossed!
That's what shocked Tom, but he never made the wrong connections! He's
too good an electrician! There's been some one in this shop, changing
the wires!"




CHAPTER XII

THE TRY OUT


Once the current was cut off it was safe to approach the body of the
young inventor. Mr. Sharp stooped over and lifted Tom's form from the
floor, for Mr. Swift was too excited and trembled too much to be of any
service. Our hero was as one dead. His body was limp, after that first
rigid stretching out, as the current ran through him; his eyes were
closed, and his face was very pale.

"Is--is there any hope?" faltered Mr. Swift.

"I think so," replied the balloonist. "He is still breathing--faintly.
We must summon a doctor at once. Will you telephone for one, while I
carry him in the house?"

As Mr. Sharp emerged from the shop, bearing Tom's body, an automobile
drew up in front of the place.

"Bless my soul!" exclaimed a voice. "Tom's hurt! How did it happen?
Bless my very existence!"

"Oh, Mr. Damon, you're just in time!" exclaimed Mr. Sharp, "Tom's had a
bad shock. Will you go for a doctor in your auto?"

"Better than that! Let me take Tom in the car to Dr. Whiteside's
office," proposed the eccentric man. "It will be better that way."

"Yes, yes," agreed Mr. Swift eagerly. "Put Tom in the auto!"

"If only it doesn't break down," added Mr. Damon fervently.  "Bless my
spark plug, but it would be just my luck!"

But they started off all right, Mr. Swift riding in front with Mr.
Damon, and Mr. Sharp supporting Tom in the tonneau. Only a little
fluttering of the eyelids, and a slow, faint breathing told that Tom
Swift still lived.

Mr. Damon never guided a car better than he did his auto that day.
Several speed laws were broken, but no one appeared to stop them, and,
in record time they had the young inventor at the physician's house.
Fortunately Dr. Whiteside was at home, and, under his skillful
treatment Tom was soon out of danger. His heart action was properly
started, and then it was only a question of time. As the doctor had
plenty of room it was decided to let the lad remain that night, and Tom
was soon installed in a spare bedroom, with the doctor's pretty
daughter to wait on him occasionally.

"Oh, I'm all right," the youth insisted, when Miss Whiteside told him
it was time for his medicine. "I'm all right."

"You're not!" she declared. "I ought to know, for I'm going to be a
nurse, some day, and help papa. Now take this or I'll have to hold your
nose, as they do the baby's," and she held out a spoonful of unpleasant
looking mixture, extending her dainty forefinger and thumb of her other
hand, as if to administer dire punishment to Tom, if he did not obey.

"Well, I give in to superior strength," he said with a laugh, as he
noted, with approval, the laughing face of his nurse.

Then he fell into a deep sleep, and was so much better the next morning
that he could be taken home in Mr. Damon's auto.

"But mind, no hard work for three or four days," insisted the
physician. "I want your heart to get in shape for that big race you
were telling me about. The shock was a severe strain to it."

Tom promised, reluctantly, and, though he did no work, his first act,
on reaching home, was to go out to the shop, to inspect the battery and
motor. To his surprise the motor was running for the lad had
established the connection, in spite of his shock and his father and
Mr. Sharp had decided to let the machinery run until he came back.

"And look at the record it's made!" cried Tom delightedly as he glanced
at the gauge. "Better than I figured on. That battery is a wonder. I'll
have the fastest electric runabout you ever saw."

"If the wires don't get crossed again," put in Mr. Sharp.  "You'd
better make an examination, Tom," and, for the first time, the young
inventor learned how he had been shocked.

"Crossed wires! I should say they were crossed!" he exclaimed as he
looked at the switches and copper conductors. "Somebody has been
tampering with them. No wonder I was shocked!"

"Who did it?" asked Mr. Sharp.

Tom considered for a moment, before answering. Then he said:

"I believe it was Addison Berg. He must have wanted to do some damage,
to get even with us for getting that treasure away from him."

"Berg?" questioned the balloonist, and Tom told of the night he had
been tripped into the brook, and exhibited the watch charm he had
secured. Mr. Sharp recognized it at once. A further examination
confirmed the belief that the submarine agent had sneaked into Tom's
workshop, and had altered the wires.

"They were all right when I came out of the shop that night," declared
Tom. "I left the old connections just as I thought I had arranged them,
and only added the new ones, when I went to try my battery. The old
connections were crossed, but I didn't notice it. Then when I turned on
the current I got the shock. I don't s'pose Berg thought I'd be so
nearly killed. Probably he wanted to burn out my motor, and spoil it.
If it was Andy Foger I could understand it, but a man like Berg--"

"He's probably wild with anger because his submarine got the worst of
it in the race for the gold," interrupted the balloonist. "Well, we'll
have to be on our guard, that's all.  What was the matter with
Eradicate, that he didn't see him enter the shop?"

"Rad went to a colored dance that night," said Tom. "I let him off. But
after this I'll have the shop guarded night and day. My motor might
have been ruined, if that first charge hadn't gone through my body
instead of into the machinery."  The improper connections were soon
removed and others substituted.

It was agreed between Tom and Mr. Sharp that they would say nothing
regarding Mr. Berg to Mr. Swift. The aeronaut caused cautious inquiries
to be made, and learned that the agent had been discharged by the
submarine firm, because of some wrong-doing in connection with the
craft Wonder, and it was surmised that the agent believed Tom to be at
the bottom of his troubles.

In a few days the young inventor was himself again, and as further
trials of his battery showed it to be even better than its owner hoped,
arrangements were made for testing it in the car on the road.

The runabout was nearly finished, but it lacked a coat of varnish, and
some minor details, when Tom, assisted by his father, Mr. Sharp and Mr.
Jackson, one morning, about a week later, installed the motor and
battery units. It did not take long to gear up the machinery, connect
the battery and, though the car was rather a crude looking affair, Tom
decided to give it a tryout.

"Want to come along, Dad?" he asked, as he tightened up some binding
posts, and looked to see that the steering wheel, starting and reverse
levers worked properly, and that the side chains were well lubricated.

"Not the first time," replied his father. "Let's see how it runs with
you, first."

"Oh, I want some sort of a load in it," went on the lad. "It won't be a
good test unless I have a couple of others besides myself. How about
you, Mr. Damon?" for the old gentleman was spending a few days at the
Swift homestead.

"Bless my shoe buttons! I'll come!" was the ready answer.  "After the
experience I've been through in the airship and submarine, nothing can
scare me. Lead on, I'll follow!"

"I don't suppose you'll hang back after that; will you, Mr. Sharp?"
asked the lad, with a laugh.

"I don't dare to, for the sake of my reputation," was the reply, for
the balloonist who had made many ascensions, and dropped thousands of
feet in parachutes, was naturally a brave man.

So he and Mr. Damon climbed into the rear seats of the odd-looking
electric car, while Tom took his place at the steering wheel.

"Are you all ready?" he asked.

"Let her go!" fired back Mr. Sharp.

"Bless my galvanometer, don't go too fast on the start," cautioned Mr.
Damon, nervously.

"I'll not," agreed the young inventor. "I want to get it warmed up
before I try any speeding."

He turned on the current. There was a low, humming purr, which
gradually increased to a whine, and the car moved slowly forward.  It
rolled along the gravel driveway to the road, Tom listening to every
sound of the machinery, as a mother listens to the breathing of a child.

"She's moving!" he cried.

"But not much faster than a wheelbarrow," said his father, who
sometimes teased his son.

"Wait!" cried the youth.

Tom turned more current into the motor. The purring and humming
increased, and the car seemed to leap forward. It was in the road now,
and, once assured that the steering apparatus was working well, Tom
suddenly turned on much more speed.

So quickly did the electric auto shoot forward that Mr. Damon and Mr.
Sharp were jerked back against the cushions of the rear seats.

"Here! What are you doing?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"I'm going to show you a little speed," answered Tom.

The car was now moving rapidly, and there was a smoothness and
lightness to its progress that was absent from a gasolene auto.  There
was no vibration from the motor. Faster and faster it ran, until it was
moving at a speed scarcely less than that of Mr. Damon's car, when it
was doing its best. Of course that was not saying much, for the car
owned by the odd gentleman was not a very powerful one, but it could
make fast time occasionally.

"Is this the best you can do?" asked Mr. Damon. "Not that it isn't
fast," he hastened to add, "and I was wondering if it was your limit."

"Not half!" cried Tom, as he turned on a little more power.  "I'm not
trying for a record to-day. I just want to see how the battery and
motor behaves."

"Pretty well, I should say," commented Mr. Sharp.

"I'm satisfied--so far," agreed the lad.

They were now moving along the highway at a good speed--moving almost
silently, too, for the motor, save for a low hum, made no noise. So
quiet was the car, in fact, that it was nearly the cause of a disaster.
Tom was so interested in the performance of his latest invention, that,
before he knew it, he had come up behind a farmer, driving a team of
skittish horses. As the big machine went past them, giving no warning
of its approach, the steeds reared up, and would have bolted, but for
the prompt action of the driver.

"Hey!" he cried, angrily, as Tom speeded past, "don't you know you got
to give warnin' when you're comin' with one of them ther gol-swizzled
things! By Jehossephat I'll have th' law on ye ef ye do thet ag'in!"

"I forgot to ring the bell," apologized Tom, as he sent out a peal from
the gong, and then, he let out a few more amperes, and the speed
increased.

"Hold on! I guess this is fast enough!" cried Mr. Damon, as his hat
blew off.

"Fast?" answered Tom. "This is nothing to what I'll do when I use the
full power. Then I'll--"

He was interrupted by a sharp report, and a vivid flash of fire on a
switch board near the steering wheel. The motor gave a sort of groan,
and stopped, the car rolling on a little way, and then becoming
stationary.

"Bless my collar button!" ejaculated Mr. Damon.

"What's the matter?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"Some sort of a blow-out," answered Tom ruefully, as he shoved the
starting handle over, trying to move the car. But it would not budge.
The new auto had "gone dead" on her first tryout. The young inventor
was grievously disappointed.




CHAPTER XIII

TOWED BY A MULE


"Bless my gizzard! Is it anything serious?" asked Mr. Damon.  "Will it
blow up, or anything like that?"

"No," replied the lad, as he leaped out of the car, and began to make
an examination. Mr. Sharp assisted him.

"The motor seems to be all right," remarked the balloonist, as he
inspected it.

"Yes," agreed our hero, "and the batteries have plenty of power left in
them yet. The gauge shows that. I can't understand what the trouble can
be, unless--" He paused in his remark and uttered an exclamation. "I've
found it!" he cried.

"What?" demanded the aeronaut.

"Some of the fuses blew out. I turned on too much current, and the
fuses wouldn't carry it. I put them in to save the motor from being
burned out, but I didn't use heavy enough ones. I see where my mistake
was."

"But what does it mean?" inquired Mr. Damon.

"It means that we've got to walk back home," was Tom's sorrowful
answer. "The car is stalled, for I haven't any extra fuses with me."

"Can't you connect up the battery by using some extra wire?" asked Mr.
Sharp. "I have some," and he drew a coil of it from his pocket.

"I wouldn't dare to. It might be so heavy that it would carry more
current than the motor could stand. I don't want to burn that out. No,
I guess we'll have to walk home, or rather I will.  You two can stay
here until I come back with heavier fuses. I'm sorry."

Tom had hardly ceased speaking, when, from around the turn in the road
proceeded a voice, and, at the sound of it all three started, for the
voice was saying:

"Now it ain't no use fer yo' to act dat-a-way, Boomerang. Yo' all ain't
got no call t' git contrary now, jest when I wants t' git home t' mah
dinner. I should t'ink you'd want t' git t' de stable, too. But ef yo'
all ain't mighty keerful I'll cut down yo' rations, dat's what I'se
goin' to do. G'lang, now, dat's a good feller. Ho! Ho! I knowed dat'd
fetch yo' all. When yo' all wiggles yo' ears dat-a-way, dat's a suah
sign yo' all is gwine t' move."

Then followed the sound of a rattletrap of a wagon approaching.

"Eradicate! It's Eradicate!" exclaimed Tom.

"And his mule, Boomerang!" added Mr. Sharp. "He's just in time!"
commented Mr. Damon with a sigh of relief, as the ancient outfit, in
charge of the aged colored man, came along. Eradicate had been sent to
Shopton to get a load of wood for Mr. Swift, and was now returning. At
the sight of the stalled auto the mule pricked up his long ears, and
threw them forward.

"Whoa dar, now, Boomerang!" cried Eradicate. "Doan't yo' all commence
t' gittin' skittish. Dat machine ain't gwine t' hurt yo'. Why good
land a' massy! Ef 'tain't Mistah Swift!" cried the colored man, as he
caught sight of Tom. "What's de trouble?" he asked.

"Broke down," answered the young inventor briefly. "You always seem to
come along when I'm in trouble, Rad."

"Dat's right," assented the darkey, with a grin. "Me an' trouble am ole
acquaintances. Sometimes she hits me a clip on de haid, den, ag'in
Boomerang, mah mule, gits it. He jest had his trouble. Got a stone
under his shoe, an' didn't want t' move. Den when I did git him started
he balked on me. But I'se all right now. But I suah am sorry fo' you.
Can't I help yo' all, Mistah Swift?"

"Yes, you can, Rad," answered Tom. "Drive home as fast as you can, and
ask Dad to send back with you some of those fuses he'll find on my work
bench. He knows what I want. Hurry there and hurry back."

Eradicate shook his head doubtfully.

"What's the matter? Don't you want to go?" asked Mr. Sharp, a trifle
nettled. "We can't get the car started until we have some new fuses."

"Oh, I wants t' go all right 'nuff, Mistah Sharp," was Eradicate's
prompt answer. "Yo' all knows I'd do anyt'ing t' 'blige yo' or Mistah
Swift. But hits dish yeah mule, Boomerang. I jest done promised him dat
we were gwine home t' dinnah, an' he 'spects a manger full ob oats. Ef
I got to Mistah Swift's house wid him, I couldn't no mo' git him t'
come back widout his dinnah, dan yo' all kin git dat 'ar car t' move
widout dem fusin' t'ings yo' all talked about."

"Bless my necktie!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "That's all nonsense!  You
don't suppose that mule understands what you say to him, do you? How
does he know you promised him his dinner?"

"I doan't know how he know, Mistah Damon," replied Eradicate, "but he
do know, jest de same. I know hit would be laik pullin' teeth an' wuss
too, t' git Boomerang t' start back wid dem foosd t'ings until after
he's had his dinner. Wouldn't it, Boomerang?"

The mule waved his long ears as if in answer.

"Bless my soul, I believe he does understand!" cried Mr. Damon.

"Of course he do," put in the colored man. "I'se awful sorry.  Now if
it were afternoon I could bring back dem what-d'ye-call-'ems in a
jiffy, 'cause Boomerang allers feels good arter he has his dinnah, but
befo' dat--" and Eradicate shook his head, as if there was no more to
be said on the subject.

"Well," remarked Tom, sadly, "I guess there's no help for it.  We'll
have to walk home, unless you two want to wait until I can ride back
with Eradicate, and come back on my motor cycle. Then I'll have to
leave the cycle here, for I can't get it in the car."

"Bless my collar button!" cried Mr. Damon. "It's like the puzzle of the
fox, the goose and the bag of corn on the banks of a stream. I guess
we'd better all walk."

"Hold on!" exclaimed Mr. Sharp. "Is your mule good and strong,
Eradicate?"

"Strong? Why dish yeah mule could pull a house ober--dat is when he's
got a mind to. An' he'd do most anyt'ing now, 'ca'se he's anxious t'
git home t' his dinnah; ain't yo' all, Boomerang?"

Once more the mule waved his ears, like signal flags.

"Then I have a proposition to make," went on the balloonist.  "Unhitch
the mule from the load of wood, and hitch him to the auto. We've got
some rope along, I noticed. Then the mule can pull us and the runabout
home."

"Good idea!" cried Mr. Damon.

"Dat's de racket!" ejaculated Eradicate. "I'll jest sequesterate dish
year load ob wood side ob de road, an' hitch Boomerang to de auto."

Tom said nothing for a few seconds.  He gazed sadly at his auto, which
he hoped would win the touring club's prize. It was a bitter pill for
him to swallow.

"Towed by a mule!" he exclaimed, shaking his head, and smiling
ruefully. "The fastest car in this country towed by a mule! It's tough
luck!"

"'Tain't half so bad as goin' widout yo' dinnah, Mistah Swift!"
remarked Eradicate, as he began to harness the mule to the electric
runabout.

Boomerang made no objection to the transfer. He looked around once or
twice as he was being made fast to the auto and, when the word was
given he stepped out as if pulling home stalled cars was his regular
business. Tom sat beside Eradicate on the front seat, and steered,
while the colored man drove the mule, and Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon were
in the "tonneau" seats as Tom called them.

"I hope no one sees us," thought Tom, but he was doomed to
disappointment. When nearly home he heard an auto approaching, and in
it were Andy Foger, Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey. The three cronies
stared at the odd sight of Boomerang ambling along, with his great ears
flapping, drawing Tom's speedy new car.

"Ha! Ha!" laughed Andy. "So that's the motive power he's going to use!
Look at him, fellows. I thought his new electric, that was going to
beat my car, and win the prize, was to be two hundred horse power.
Instead it's one mule power! That's rich!" and Andy's chums joined in
the laugh at poor Tom.

The young inventor said nothing, for there was nothing he could say. In
dignified silence he passed the car containing his enemies, they,
meanwhile, jeering at him.

"Dat's all right," spoke Eradicate, sympathizing with his young
employer. "Maybe dey'll 'want a tow derselves some day, an' when dey
does, I'll make Boomerang pull 'em in a ditch."

But this was small comfort to Tom. He made up his mind, though, that he
would demonstrate that his car could do all that he had claimed for it,
and that very soon.




CHAPTER XIV

A GREAT RUN


Boomerang did not belie the reputation Eradicate had given him as a
beast of strength. Though the electric runabout was heavy, the mule
managed to move it along the road at a fair speed, with the four
occupants. Perhaps the animal knew that at the end of his journey a
good feed awaited him. At any rate they were soon within sight of the
Swift home.

Mr. Damon and Mr. Sharp refrained from making any comments that might
hurt Tom's feelings, for they realized the chagrin felt by the young
inventor in having his apparatus go back on him at the first trial. But
our hero was not the kind of a lad who is disheartened by one failure,
or even half a dozen.

The humor of the situation appealed to him, and, as he turned the auto
into the driveway, and noticed Boomerang's long ears waving to and fro,
he laughed.

The lad insisted on putting new fuses in the car before he ate his
dinner, and then, satisfied that the motor was once more in running
order, he partook of a hasty meal, and began making several changes
which he had decided were desirable. He finished them in time to go for
a little run in the car all alone on a secluded road late that
afternoon.

Tom returned, with eyes shining, and cheeks flushed with elation.

"Well, how did it go? asked his father.

"Fine! Better than I expected," responded his son enthusiastically.
"When it gets to running smoothly I'll pass anything on the road."

"Don't be too sure," cautioned Mr. Swift, but Tom only smiled.

There was still much to do on the electric runabout, and Tom spent the
next few days in adjusting the light steel wind-shield, that was to
come down over the driver's seat. He also put in a powerful electric
search-light, which was run by current from the battery, and installed
a new speedometer and an instrument to tell how much current he was
using, and how much longer the battery would run without being
exhausted. This was to enable him to know when to begin recharging it.
When the current was all consumed it was necessary to store more in the
battery. This could be done by attaching wires from a dynamo, or, in an
emergency by tapping an electric light wire in the street. But as the
battery would enable the car to run many miles on one charging, Tom did
not think he would ever have to resort to the emergency charging
apparatus. He had a new system for this, one that enabled him to do the
work in much less than the usual time.

With his new car still unpainted, and rather rough and crude in
appearance, the lad started out alone one morning, his father and Mr.
Sharp having declined to accompany him, on the plea of business to
attend to, and Mr. Damon not being at the Swift house.

Tom rode about for several hours, giving his car several severe tests
in the way of going up hills, and speeding on the level. He was
proceeding along a quiet country road, in a small town about fifteen
miles from Shopton, when, as he flashed past the small railroad
station, he saw a familiar figure standing on the platform.

"Why, Ned!" called Tom, "what are you doing over here?"

"I might ask the same thing of you. Is that your new car? It doesn't
look very new."

"Yes, this is it. I haven't had a chance to paint and varnish it yet.
But you ought to see it go. What are doing here, though?"

"I came over on some bank business. A customer here had some bonds he
wanted to dispose of and I came for them. You see we're enlarging our
business since the new bank started."

"Has it hurt your bank any?"

"Not yet, but Foger and his associates are trying hard to make us lose
money. Say, did you ever see such a place as this? I've got to wait two
hours for a train back to Shopton."

"No you haven't."

"Why not? Have they changed the timetable since I came over this
morning?"

"No, but you can ride back with me.  I'm going, and I'll show you what
my new electric car can do."

"Good!" cried the young bank cashier. "You're just in time. I was
wondering how I could kill two hours, but now I'll get in your new car
and--"

"And maybe we'll kill a few chickens, or a dog or two when we get her
speeded up," put in Tom, with a laugh in which Ned joined.

The two lads, seated in the front part of the auto, were soon moving
down the hard highway. Suddenly Tom pulled a lever and the steel
wind-shield came sliding down from the top case, meeting the forward
battery compartment, and forming a sort of slanting roof over the heads
of the two occupants.

"Here! What's this?" cried Ned.

"We're going to hit it up in a few minutes," replied the young
inventor, "and I want to reduce the wind resistance."

"Oh, I thought maybe we were going through a bombardment. It's all
right, go ahead, don't mind me. I'm game."

There was a celluloid window in the steel wind-shield, and through this
the lads could observe the road ahead of them.

As they swung along it, the speed increasing, Ned saw an auto ahead of
them.

"Whose car is that?" he asked.

"Don't know," replied Tom. "We'll be up to it in about half a minute,
though."

As the electric runabout, more dilapidated looking than ever from the
layer of dust that covered it, passed the other auto, which was a
powerful car, the solitary occupant of it, a middle-aged man, looked to
one side, and, seeing the queer machine, remarked:

"You fellows are going the wrong way to the junk heap. Turn around."

"Is that so?" asked Tom, his eyes flashing at the cheap wit of the man.
"Why we came out here to show you the way!"

"Do you want to race?" asked the man eagerly, too eagerly, Ned thought.
"I'll give you a brush, if you do, and a handicap into the bargain."

"We don't need it," replied the young inventor quickly.

"I'll wager fifty dollars I can beat you bad on this three-mile
stretch," went on the autoist. "How about it?"

"I'll race you, but I don't bet," answered Tom, a bit stiffly.

"Oh, be a sport," urged the man.

Tom shook his head. He had slowed down his machine, and was running
even with the gasolene car now. He noticed that it was a new one, of
six cylinders, and looked speedy. Perhaps he was foolish to pit his
untried car against it. Yet he had confidence in his battery and motor.

"Well, we'll race for the fun of it then," went on the man. "Do you
want a handicap?"

Tom shook his head again, and there came around his mouth a grim look.

"All right," assented the other. "Only you're going to be beat badly. I
never saw an electric car yet that could do anything except to crawl
along."

"You're going to see one now," was all the retort Tom permitted himself.

"Here we go then!" cried the man, and he gave his gear handle a yank,
and shoved over the sparking and gasolene levers.

His car instantly shot ahead, and went "chug chugging" down the road in
a cloud of dust. At the same moment Tom, in answer to a look from Ned,
who feared his friend was going to be left behind, turned more power
into the motor. The humming, purring sound increased and the electric
car forged ahead.

"Can you catch him?" asked Ned.

"Watch," was all Tom said.

The hum of the motor became a sort of whine, and the electric rapidly
acquired speed. It crept up on the gasolene car, as an express train
overtakes a freight, and the man, looking back, and expecting to see
his rival far behind was surprised to note the queer looking vehicle
lapping his rear wheels.

"Well, you are coming on, aren't you?" he asked. "Maybe you'll keep up
now!" He shifted the gears, using a little more gasolene.  For a moment
his car opened a wide gap between it and Tom's, but the young inventor
had only begun to race. Still louder purred the motor, and in a few
minutes Tom was running on even terms with his competitor. The man
looked annoyed, and tried, by the skilful use of gasolene and sparking
levers, to leave Tom behind.  But the electric held her own.

"I've got to go the limit I see," remarked the man at last, glancing
sideways at the other car. "I'll tell 'em you're coming," he added,
"though I must say your electric does better than any of its kind I
ever came across."

"I'm not done yet," was the comment of our hero. But the man did not
hear him, for he was yanking into place the lever that enabled him to
run on direct drive for fourth speed.

Forward shot his car, and, for perhaps a quarter of a mile it led. The
racers were almost at the end of the three-mile level stretch of road,
and if Tom was going to win the impromptu contest it seemed high time
he began.

"Can you catch him?" asked Ned anxiously.

"Watch," was his chum's reply. "I haven't used my high speed gear yet.
I'm afraid the fuses won't stand it, but here goes for a try, anyhow."

He threw over a switch, changed a lever and then, having pushed into
place the last gear, he grasped the steering wheel more firmly.

There was need of it, for, in an instant, the electric runabout, with
the motors fairly roaring, swept up the road, after the gasolene car
that was almost hidden from sight in a cloud of dust. Faster and faster
went Tom's car. The young inventor was listening with critical ear to
the song of the machinery. He wanted to learn if it was running sweet
and true, for that is how a careful mechanic tests his apparatus. Foot
by foot the distance between the two cars lessened. Now the electric
was lapping the rear wheels of the gasolene machine, but the driver did
not know it. His whole attention was on the road ahead of him.

"Half a mile more!" cried Ned, naming the distance which yet remained
of the straight stretch. "Can you do it, Tom?"

His chum nodded. He shoved the controller handle over to the last
notch, and then waited an anxious second. Would the fuse carry the
extra load? It seemed so, for there was a slight increase of power.

An instant later Tom gave a sudden twist to the steering wheel.  It was
well that he did, for he was passing the gasolene car dangerously
close. Then he was ahead of it, and in a second he was three lengths in
advance.

Desperately the man opened his muffler, and sought to gain by this
advantage, but though his car gave off explosions like a battery of
guns in action, he could not gain on Tom. The electric shot around a
curve in the road, winner of the impromptu race by an eighth of a mile.

"Well," asked Tom of his chum, as he slowed down, for the road now was
not so good, "did I do it?"

"You certainly did. Whew! But we did scoot along?"

"Eighty miles an hour there one spell," went on the young inventor,
glancing at a gauge. "But I've got to do better than that to win the
big race."




CHAPTER XV

ANDY FOGER'S BLACK EYE


Around the bend came the six-cylinder touring car. The driver, with a
surprised look on his face, was slacking up. He ran his machine up
alongside of Tom's.

"Say," he asked, in dazed tones, "did you take a short cut, or anything
like that to get ahead of me?"

"No," answered the youth.

"And you didn't jump me in the air?"

"No," was Tom's answer, smilingly given.

"Well, all I've got to say is that you've got a wonderful car there,
Mr.--er--er--"  He paused suggestively.

"Swift is my name," our hero answered. "Thomas Swift, of Shopton."

"Ah, I've heard of you. My name is Layton--Paul Layton. I'm from
Netherton. Let's see, you built an airship, didn't you?"

"I helped," Tom admitted modestly.

"Well, you beat me fair and square, and if I do say it myself I've got
a fairly speedy car. Took two firsts at the Indianapolis meet last
month. But you certainly scooted ahead of me. Where did you buy that
electric, if I may ask?"

"I made it."

"I might have known," admitted the man. "But are you going to put them
on the market? If you are I'd like to get one. I want the fastest car
going, and you seem to have it."

"I hadn't thought of manufacturing them for sale," said the young
inventor. "If I do, I'll let you know."

"I wish you would. My! I had no idea you could beat me, but you
did--fair and square."

There was some more talk, and then Mr. Layton started on, after
exacting from Tom a further promise to let him know if any electrics
were to be made for sale.

"You certainly have a wonderful car," complimented Ned, as he and his
chum took a short cut to Shopton.

"Well, I'm not quite satisfied with it," declared Tom.

"Why not?"

"Well, I've set a hundred miles an hour as my limit. I didn't make but
eighty to-day. I've got to have more speed if I go up against the crowd
that will race for the touring club's prize."

"Can you make a hundred miles?"

"I think so. I've got to change my gears, though, and use heavier
fuses. I was afraid every second that one of the fuses would melt, and
leave me stranded. But they stood pretty well. Of course, when the car,
geared as it is now, has been run a little longer it will go faster,
but it won't come up to a hundred miles an hour. That's what I want,
and that's what I'm going to get," and the lad looked very determined.

Ned was taken to the bank, and, as Tom turned his machine around, to go
home, he saw, standing on the steps of the new bank, which was almost
across the street from the old one, Andy Foger, and the bully's father.
The red-haired lad laughed at Tom's rough looking car, and said
something to his parent, but Mr. Foger did not notice Tom. Not that
this caused our hero any uneasiness, however.

But, as he swung away from the bank, he saw, coming up the street a
figure that instantly attracted his attention. It was that of Mr. Berg,
and Tom at once recalled the night he had pursued the submarine agent,
and torn loose his watch charm. Mr. Berg was evidently going to enter
the new bank, for, at the sight of the former agent, Mr. Foger
descended the steps, and went to meet him.

Tom, however, had decided upon a plan of action. He steered his machine
in toward the curb, ran up the steel wind-shield, and called:

"Mr. Berg!"

"Eh? What's that?" asked the agent, in some surprise. Then, as he
caught sight of Tom, and recognized him, he added: "I'm very busy now,
my young friend. You'll have to excuse me."

"I won't detain you a moment," went on Tom, casually. "I have something
of yours that I wish to return to you."

"Something of mine?" Mr. Berg was evidently puzzled. He approached the
electric car, in spite of the fact that Mr. Foger was calling him.
"Something of mine? What is it?"

"This!" exclaimed Tom suddenly, extending the compass watch charm,
which he always carried with him of late.

"That! Where did you get that. I lost it--"

Mr. Berg paused in some confusion.

"I grabbed it off your watch chain the night you were hiding in our
shrubbery, and tripped me into the brook," answered the lad, looking
the man squarely in the eye.

"Hiding? Tripped you? Grabbed that off my chain--" stammered Mr. Berg.
He had taken the charm up in his fingers, but now he quickly dropped it
back into Tom's hand. "I guess you're mistaken," he added quickly.
"That's not mine. I never had one--I--er--that's not mine--at
least--Oh, you'll have to excuse me, young man, I'm in a hurry, and I
have an important engagement!" and with that Mr. Berg wheeled off, and
joined Mr. Foger, who stood on the sidewalk, waiting for him.

"I thought sure it was yours," said Tom, easily. "Perhaps Mr. Foger
will keep it in one of the safety-deposit boxes of his bank, until the
owner claims it," and he looked at the banker.

"What's that?" asked Andy's father.

"This watch charm which I grabbed off Mr. Berg's chain the night he was
sneaking around our house, and crossed the electric wires," went on the
lad.

"Don't listen to him. He doesn't know what he is saying!" exclaimed the
former submarine boat agent. "It's not my charm.  He's crazy!"

"Oh, am I?" thought Tom, with a grim look on his face. "Well, we'll see
about that, Mr. Berg," and, putting the charm back in his pocket, Tom
swung his machine toward home, while the agent and the banker entered
the new institution.

"So they're getting chummy," mused Tom. "Andy and Berg were friends
when Andy shut me up in the submarine tank, and now Berg comes here to
do business, and Foger and his associates are trying to put the old
bank out of business. I wonder if there's any connection there? I must
keep my eyes open. Berg is an unscrupulous man, and so is Andy's
father, to say nothing of the red-haired bully himself. He had nerve to
deny that was his charm. Well, maybe I'll catch him some day."

Tom spent a busy week making new adjustments to his electric car,
changing the gear and providing for heavier fuses. He was planning for
another trip on the road, as the time for the great race was drawing
near, and he wanted the mechanism to be in perfect shape.

One evening, as he was preparing for a short night trip to Mansburg,
where he had promised to call for Miss Nestor, Tom left his machine
standing in the road in front of the house, while he went back to get a
robe, as it threatened to be chilly.

As he came back to enter the car, he saw some one standing near it.

"Is that you, Ned?" he called. "Come, take a spin."

Hardly had he spoken than there sounded from the machine a whirr that
told of the current being turned on.

"Don't do that!" cried Tom, knowing at once that it could not be Ned,
who never meddled with the machinery.

A blinding flash and a loud report followed, and Tom saw some one leap
from his car, and try to run away. But the figure stumbled, and, a
moment later the young inventor was upon him, grappling with him.

"Here! Let me go!" cried a voice, and Tom uttered an exclamation of
surprise.

"Andy Foger!" he cried. "I've caught you! You tried to damage my car!"

"Yes, and I'm hurt, too!" whined Andy. "My father will sue you for
damages if I die."

"No danger of that; you're too mean," murmured Tom, as he maintained a
tight grip on the bully.

"You let me go!" demanded Andy, squirming to get away.

"Wait until I see what damage you've done," retorted the young
inventor. "The worst, though, would be the blowing out of a fuse, for I
had the gear disconnected. You wait a minute now. Maybe it's you who'll
have to pay damages."

"You let me go!" fairly screamed Andy, and he aimed a blow at Tom. It
caught our hero on the chest and Tom's fighting blood was up in an
instant. He drew back his left hand, and delivered a blow that landed
fairly on Andy's right eye. The bully staggered and went down in the
dust.

"There!" cried Tom, righteously angry. "That will teach you not to try
to damage my car, and then hit me into the bargain! Now clear out,
before I give you some more!"

Whining and blubbering Andy arose to his feet.

"You just wait. I'll get square with you for this," he threatened.

"You can accept part of that as pay for what you did in the tar and
feathering game," added Tom. Then, as Andy moved in front of one of the
electric side lamps on the car, Tom uttered a whistle of surprise. For
both of Andy's eyes were bruised and swollen, though Tom had only hit
him once.

"Look at me!" cried the bully, more squint-eyed than ever.  "Look at
me! You hit me in one eye, and that explosion hit me in the other! My
father will sue you for this."

As he hurried off down the road Tom understood. Andy coming along, had
seen Tom's car standing there, and, thinking to do some mischief, had
climbed in, and turned on the power. Perhaps he hoped it would run into
the roadside ditch and be smashed. But as the gear was out, turning on
the electric current had a different effect. As the bully pulled the
handle over too quickly, throwing almost the entire force of the
battery into the wires at once, the load was too heavy for them. A
safety fuse blew out, causing the flare and the explosion, and a piece
of the soft lead-like metal had hit the red-haired lad in the eye.
Tom's fist had completed the work on the other optic, and for several
days thereafter Andy Foger remained in seclusion. When he did go out
there were many embarrassing questions put to him, as to when he had
had the fight. Andy didn't care to answer. As for Tom, it did not take
long to put a new fuse in his car, and he greatly enjoyed his ride with
Miss Nestor that night.




CHAPTER XVI

TROUBLE AT THE BANK


Coming in rather late from his trip to Mansburg, and thinking of some
things he and Miss Nestor had talked about, Tom was rather surprised,
on reaching the house, to see a light in his father's particular room,
where the aged inventor did his reading and his planning of new devices.

"Dad's up rather late," said Tom to himself. "I wonder if he's studying
over some new machine."

The lad ran his auto into the temporary garage he had built for it, and
connected the wires of a burglar alarm he had arranged, to give warning
in case any of his enemies should seek to damage the car.

Tom encountered Garret Jackson, the aged inventor who was going his
rounds, seeing that everything was all right about the various shops.

"Anybody with my father, Garret?" asked the lad. "I see he's still up."

"Yes," was the rather unexpected reply. "Mr. Damon is with him.
They've been in your father's room all the evening--ever since you went
away in the car."

"Anything the matter?" inquired the young inventor, a bit anxious, as
he thought of the Happy Harry gang.

"Well, I don't know," and the engineer seemed puzzled. "They called me
in once to know if everything was all right outside, and to inquire if
you were back. I saw, then, that they were busy figuring over
something, but I didn't take much notice. Only I heard Mr. Damon say:
'There's going to be trouble if we can't realize on those bonds,' and
then I came away."

"Is that all he said?" asked Tom.

"No, he said 'Bless my buttons,' or something like that; but he blesses
so many things I didn't pay much attention."

"That's right," agreed the lad. "But I wonder what the trouble is
about? I must go see."

As he passed along the hall, out of which his father's combined study
and library opened, the aged inventor came to the door.

"Is that you, Tom?" he asked.

"Yes, Dad."

"Come in here, if you haven't anything else to do. Mr. Damon is here."

Tom needed but a single glance at the faces of his father and Mr. Damon
to see that something was troubling the two. The table in front of them
was littered with papers covered with rows of figures.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom.

"Well, I suppose I ought not to let it bother me, but it does," replied
his father.

"Something wrong with your patents, Dad? Has the crowd of bad men been
bothering you again?"

"No, it isn't that. It's trouble at the bank, Tom."

"Has it been robbed again?" asked the lad quickly. "If it has I can
prove an alibi," and he smiled at the recollection of the time he and
Mr. Damon had been accused of looting the vault, as told in "Tom Swift
and His Airship."

"No, it hasn't been robbed in just that way," put in Mr. Damon.  "But,
bless my shoe laces, it's almost as bad! You see, Tom, since Mr. Foger
started the new bank he's done his best to cripple the one in which
your father and I are interested. I may say we are very vitally
interested in it, for, since the withdrawal of Foger and his
associates, your father and I have been elected directors."

"I didn't know that," remarked the lad.

"No, I didn't tell you, because you were so busy on your electric car,"
rejoined Mr. Swift. "But Mr. Damon and I, being both large depositors,
were asked to assume office, and, as I was not very busy on patent
affairs, I consented."

"But what is the trouble?" inquired Tom.

"I'm coming to it," resumed Mr. Damon. "Bless my check book, I'm coming
to it! You see we have lost several good customers, by reason of Foger
opening the new bank. That wouldn't have mattered so much, as between
your father and myself, and one or two others, we have enough capital
to carry on the business of the bank. But there is a more serious
matter. We hold a number of very good securities, but they are of a
class hard to realize cash for, on short notice. In other words they
are not active bonds, though they are issued by reliable concerns.
Then, too, the bank has lost considerable money by not doing as much
business as it formerly did. In short we don't know just what to do,
Tom, and your father and I were discussing it, when you came in."

"Do you need more money?" asked Tom. "I have some, that is my share
from the submarine treasure, and some I have allowed to accumulate as
royalties from my patents. It's about ten thousand dollars, and you're
welcome to it."

"Thank you, Tom," spoke his father. "We may use your cash, but we'll
need a great deal more than that."

"But why?" asked the lad. "I don't understand. If you have good bonds,
can't you dispose of them, and get the money?"

"We could, Tom, yes, if we had time," replied Mr. Damon. "But to throw
the bonds on the market at short notice would mean that we would not
get a good price for them. We would lose considerable."

"But why do it in a hurry?"

"Because there is need of hurry," responded Mr. Swift.

"That's it," joined in Mr. Damon. "We have to have cash in a hurry,
Tom, to meet pressing demands, and we don't just see our way clear to
get it. I am trying to raise it on some private securities I own, but I
can't get an answer within several days.  Meanwhile the bank may fail,
because of lack of funds. Of course no one would lose anything,
ultimately, as we could go into the hands of a receiver, and,
eventually pay dollar for dollar. Your father and I, and some of the
other directors, might lose a little, but the depositors would not. But
your father and I don't like the idea of failing. It's something I've
never done, and I'm too old to start in now, bless my cash ledger if
I'm not!"

"And for the sake of my reputation in this community I don't want to
see the bank close its doors," added Mr. Swift. "It would give Foger
too good a chance to crow over us."

"And you need cash in a hurry," went on Tom. "How much?"

"Fifty thousand dollars at least," replied Mr. Damon.

"And if you don't get it?"

The eccentric man shrugged his shoulders.

"Well," remarked Mr. Swift musingly, "I don't see that we need worry
you about it, Tom. Perhaps--"

Mr. Swift was interrupted by a ring at the front door. The three looked
at each other. It was late for a caller, and Mrs. Baggert had gone to
bed.

"I'll answer it," volunteered Tom. He switched on the electric light in
the hall, and opened the door. He was confronted by Mr. Pendergast, the
president of the bank.

"Is your father in?" asked Mr. Pendergast, and he seemed to be much
agitated.

"Yes, he is," replied the lad. "Come this way, please."

"I want to see him on important business," went on the president, as he
followed the young inventor. "I'm afraid I have bad news for him and
Mr. Damon. Bad news, Tom, bad news," and the aged banker's voice
trembled. Tom, with a chill of apprehension seeming to clutch his
heart, threw open the library door.




CHAPTER XVII

A RUN ON THE BANK


"Why, Mr. Pendergast!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, rising quickly as Tom
ushered in the aged president. "Whatever is the matter? You here at
this hour? Bless my trial balance! Is anything wrong?

"I'm afraid there is," answered the bank head. "I have just received
word which made it necessary for me to see you both at once. I'm glad
you're here, Mr. Damon."

He sank wearily into a chair which Tom placed for him, and Mr. Swift
asked:

"Have you been able to raise any cash, Mr. Pendergast?"

"No, I am sorry to say I have not, but I did not come here to tell you
that. I have bad news for you. As soon as we open our doors in the
morning, there will be a run on the bank."

"A run on the bank?" repeated Mr. Swift.

"The moment we begin business in the morning," went on Mr. Pendergast.

"Bless my soul, then don't begin business!" cried Mr. Damon.

"We must," insisted Mr. Pendergast. "To keep the doors closed would be
a confession at once that we have failed. No, it is better to open
them, and stand the run as long as we can. When we have exhausted our
cash--" he paused.

"Well?" asked Mr. Damon.

"Then we'll fail--that's all."

"But we mustn't let the bank fail!" cried Mr. Swift. "I am willing to
put some of my personal fortune into the bank capital in order to save
it. So is my son here."

"That's right," chimed in Tom heartily. "All I've got. I'm not going to
let Andy Foger get ahead of us; nor his father either."

"I'll help to the limit of my ability," added Mr. Damon.

"I appreciate all that," continued the president. "But the unfortunate
part of it is that we need cash. You gentlemen, like myself, probably,
have your money tied up in stocks and bonds. It is hard to get cash
quickly, and we must have cash as soon as we open in the morning, to
pay the depositors who will come flocking to the doors. We must prepare
for a run on the bank."

"How do you know there will be a run?" asked the young inventor.

"I received word this evening, just before I came here," replied Mr.
Pendergast. "A poor widow, who has a small amount in the bank, called
on me and said she had been advised to withdraw all her cash. She said
she preferred to see me about it first, as she did not like to lose her
interest. She said a number of her acquaintances, some of whom are
quite heavy depositors, had also been warned that the bank was unsound,
and that they ought to take out their savings and deposits at once."

"Did she say who had thus warned her?" inquired Mr. Swift.

"She did," was the reply, "and that shows me that there is a conspiracy
on foot to ruin our bank. She stated that Mr. Foger had told her our
institution was unsound."

"Mr. Foger!" cried Mr. Damon. "So this is one of his tricks to bolster
up his new bank! He hopes the people who withdraw their money from our
bank will deposit with him. I see his game. He's a scoundrel, and if
it's possible I'm going to sue him for damages after this thing is
over."

"Did he warn the others?" inquired the aged inventor.

"Not all of them," answered the president. "Some received letters from
a man signing himself Addison Berg, warning them that our bank, was
likely to fail any day."

"Addison Berg!" exclaimed Tom. "That must have been the important
business he had with Mr. Foger, the day I showed him the watch charm!
They were plotting the ruin of our bank then," and he told his father
about his disastrous pursuit of the submarine agent.

"Very likely Foger is working with Berg," admitted Mr. Damon.  "We will
attend to them later. The question is, what can we do to save the bank?"

"Get cash, and plenty of it," advised Mr. Pendergast. "Suppose we go
over the whole situation again?" and they fell to talking stocks:
bonds, securities, mortgages and interest, until the youth, interested
as he was in the situation, could follow it no longer.

"Better go to bed, Tom," advised his father. "You can't help us any,
and we have many details to go over."

The lad reluctantly consented, and he was soon dreaming that he was in
his electric auto, trying to pull up a thousand pound lump of gold from
the bottom of the sea. He awoke to find the bedclothes in a lump on his
chest, and, removing them, fell into a deep slumber.

When the young inventor awoke the next morning, Mrs. Baggert told him
that his father and Mr. Damon had risen nearly an hour before, had
partaken of a hearty breakfast, and departed.

"They told me to tell you they were at the bank," said the housekeeper.

"Did Mr. Pendergast stay all night?" inquired Tom.

"I heard some one go away about two o'clock this morning," replied the
housekeeper. "I don't know who it was."

"They must have had a long session," thought Tom, as he began on his
bacon, eggs and coffee. "I'll take a run down to the bank in my
electric in a little while."

The car was still in rather crude shape, outwardly, but the mechanism
was now almost perfect. Tom charged the batteries well before starting
out.

The youth had no sooner come in sight of the old Shopton bank, to
distinguish it from the Second National, which Mr. Foger had started,
than he was aware that something unusual had occurred.  There was quite
a crowd about it, and more persons were constantly arriving to swell
the throng.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom, of one of the few police officers of
which Shopton boasted, though the lad did not need to be told.

"Run on the bank," was the brief answer. "It's failed."

Tom felt a pang of disappointment. Somehow, he had hoped that his
father and his friends might have been able to stave off ruin. As he
approached nearer Tom was made aware that the crowd was in an ugly mood.

"Why don't they open the doors and give us our money?" cried one
excited woman. "It's ours! I worked hard for mine, an' now they want to
keep it from us. I wish I'd put it in the new bank."

"Yes, that's the best place," added another. "That Mr. Foger has lots
of money."

"I can see the hand of Andy's father, and that of Mr. Berg, at work
here," thought Tom, "They have spread rumors of the bank's trouble, and
hope to profit by it. I wish I could find a way to beat them at their
own game."

As the minutes passed, and the bank was not opened, the ugly temper of
the crowd increased. The few police could do nothing with the mob, and
several, bolder than the rest, advocated battering down the doors. Some
went up the steps and began to pound on the portals. Tom looked for a
sight of his father or Mr. Damon, but could not see either.

It was not the regular hour for opening the bank, but when the police
reminded the people of this they only laughed.

"I guess they ain't going to open anyhow!" shouted a man.  "They've got
our money, and they're going to keep it. What difference is an hour,
anyway?"

"Yes, if they have the money, why don't they open, and not wait until
ten o'clock?" cried another. "I've got a hundred and five dollars in
there, and I want it!"

More excited persons were arriving every minute. The crowd surged this
way, and that. Many looked anxiously at the clock in the tower of the
town hall. The gilded hands pointed to a few minutes of ten. Would the
bank open its doors when the hour boomed out? Many were anxiously
asking this question.

Tom sat in his electric car, near the front of the bank. The interest
of the crowd, which under ordinary circumstances would have been
centered in the queer vehicle, was not drawn toward it.  The people
were all thinking of their money.

Suddenly one of the two doors of the bank slowly opened. There was a
yell from the crowd, and a rush to get in. But the police managed to
hold the leaders back, and then Tom saw that it was Ned Newton, who
stood in the partly-opened portal. He held up his hand to indicate
silence, and a hush fell over the mob.

"The bank is open for business," Ned announced, "but there must be no
rush. The building is not large enough to accommodate you all. If you
form a line, you will be admitted in turn. The bank hopes to pay you
all."

"Hopes!" cried a woman scornfully. "We can't eat hopes, young man, nor
yet pay the rent with it. Hopes indeed!"

But Ned had said all he cared to, and, with rather a white face, he
went back inside. The one door remained open and, with a policeman on
either side, a line of anxious depositors was slowly formed. Tom
watched them crowding and surging forward, all eager to be first to get
their cash out, lest there be not enough for all. As he watched, the
young inventor was aware that some was signaling to him from the big
window of the bank. He looked more closely and saw Ned Newton beckoning
to him, and the young cashier was motioning Tom to go around to the
rear, where a door of the bank opened on a small alley. Wondering what
was wanted, Tom slowly ran his machine down the side street, and up the
alley. No one paid any attention to him.

A porter admitted the lad, and he made his way to the private offices,
where he knew his father and Mr. Damon would be. In the corridors he
could hear the murmur of the throng and the chink of money, as the
tellers paid it out.

"Well, Tom, this is bad business," remarked Mr. Swift, as he saw his
son. The lad noticed that Mr. Damon was in the telephone booth.

"Yes, Dad," admitted Tom. "It's a run, all right. What are you going to
do?"

"The best we can. Pay out all the cash we have, and hope that before
that time, the people will come to their senses. The bank is all right
if they would only wait. But I'm afraid they won't and, after we pay
out all the cash we have, we'll have to close the doors. Then there's
sure to be an unpleasant scene, and maybe some of the more hot-headed
ones will advocate violence. We have given orders to the tellers to pay
out as slowly as possible, so as to enable us to gain some time."

"And all you need is money; is that it, Dad?"

"That's it, Tom, but we have exhausted every possibility. Mr. Damon is
trying a forlorn hope now, but, even if he is successful--"

Before Mr. Swift had ceased speaking, Mr. Damon fairly burst from the
telephone booth. He was much excited.

"I've got it! I've got it!" he cried.

"What?" asked Mr. Swift and Tom in the same breath.

"The cash, or, what's just as good, the promise of it. I called up Mr.
Chase, of the Clayton National Bank, and he has agreed to take the
railroad securities I offered him as collateral, and let me have sixty
thousand dollars on them! That will give us cash enough to weather the
storm. Hurrah! We're all right now. Bless my check book!"

"The Clayton National Bank," remarked Mr. Swift, and his voice was
hopeless. "It's forty miles away, Mr. Damon, and no railroad around
here runs anywhere near it. No one could get there and back with the
cash to-day, in time to save us from ruin. It's impossible! Our last
chance is gone."

"How far did you say it was, Dad?" asked Tom quickly.

"Forty miles there, over forty, I guess, and not very good roads. We
would need to have the cash here before three o'clock to be of any
service to us. No, it's out of the question. The bank will have to
fail!"

"No!" cried the young inventor, and his voice rang out through the
room. "I'll get the cash for you!"

"How?" gasped Mr. Damon. "You can't get there and back in time?"

"Yes, I can!" cried Tom. "In my electric runabout! I can make it go a
hundred miles an hour, if necessary! Probably I'll have to run slow
over the bad roads; but I can do it! I know I can.  I'll get the sixty
thousand dollars for you!"

For a moment there was silence. Then Mr. Damon cried:

"Good! And I'll go with you and deliver the securities to Mr. Chase.
Come on, Tom Swift! Bless my collar button, but maybe we can yet save
the old bank after all!"




CHAPTER XVIII

AFTER THE CASH


Tom's proposal as a way out of the difficulty, and the prompt seconding
of it by Mr. Damon, seemed to deprive the other bank officials, Mr.
Swift included, of the power of speech for a few moments. Then, as
there came to the room where the scene had taken place, the sound of
the mob outside, clamoring for cash, Mr. Pendergast, the president,
remarked in a low voice:

"It seems to be the only way. Do you think you can do it, Tom Swift?"

"I'm sure of it, as far as my electric car is concerned," replied the
young inventor. "If we get the cash I'll have it back here on time. The
runabout is all ready for a fast trip."

"Then don't lose any time, Tom," advised his father. "Every minute
counts."

"Yes," added Mr. Damon. "Come on. I've got the securities in my valise,
and we can bring the cash back in the same satchel. Come on, Tom."

The eccentric character caught up his valise, and started from the
room. Tom followed.

"Now, my son, be careful," advised his father. "You know the need of
haste, but don't take unnecessary risks. You'd better go out the back
way, as the crowd is easily excited."

Little more was said. Mr. Swift clasped his son's hand in a firm
pressure, and the bank president nervously bade the lad good-by. Then,
slipping out of the bank, by the rear entrance, the porter closing the
door after them, Tom and Mr. Damon took their places in the electric
machine.

"Just imagine you're racing for that three-thousand-dollar prize,
offered by the Touring Club of America, Tom," observed Mr. Damon, as he
deposited the valise at his feet.

"I don't have to do that," replied the youth. "I'm trying for a bigger
prize than that. I want to save the bank, and defeat the schemes of the
Fogers--father and son."

Tom turned on the power, and the machine rolled out on the main street.
As it turned the corner, leaving the impatient crowd of depositors, now
larger than ever, behind, Mr. Damon glanced over at the new bank, and,
as he did so, he called to Tom:

"There are the Fogers now."

The young inventor looked, and saw Andy and his father on the steps of
the new institution.

At the sight of the electric car, speeding along, Andy turned and spoke
to his parent. What he said seemed to impress Mr. Foger, for he
started, and looked more intently at Tom and Mr. Damon. Then, as Tom
watched, he saw the two excitedly conversing, and a moment later Andy
ran off in the direction in which Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey lived.

"I wonder if he's up to any tricks?" thought Tom, as he turned on more
power. "Well, if he is, I'll soon be where he can't reach me."

The young inventor did not dare send his car at full speed through the
streets of the town, and it was not until several minutes had passed
that they could go at more than the ordinary rate. But once the open
country was reached Tom "opened her up full," and the song the motor
sung was one of power. The vehicle quickly gathered headway and was
soon fairly whizzing along.

"If we keep this up we'll be there and back in good time," remarked Mr.
Damon.

"Yes, but we can't do it," replied his companion. "The road to Clayton
is a poor one, and we'll soon be on it. Then we'll have to go slow. But
I'll make all the time I can until then."

So, for several miles more they crept along, at times having to reduce
to almost a walking pace, because of bad roads. Mr. Damon looked at his
watch almost every other minute.

"Eleven o'clock," he remarked, as they passed a milestone, "and we're
not half way there. Bless my gizzard, but I'm afraid we won't make it,
Tom. We left about ten, and we ought to be back by two o'clock to do
any good. That's four hours, and it will take some time to transfer the
securities, and get the cash. Every minute counts."

"I know it," answered Tom, "and I'm going to count every minute."

With eager eyes he watched every inch of the road, to steer to the best
advantage. His hands gripped the wheel until his knuckles showed white
with the strain, and, every now and then his right hand adjusted the
speed lever or the controller handle, while his foot was on the
emergency brake, ready to stop the car at the first sign of danger.

And there was danger, not infrequently, for the road was up and down
hill, over frail bridges, and along steep cliffs. It was no pleasure
tour they were on.

When a little over half the distance had been made they came to a
better road, and Tom was able to use full speed ahead. Then the
electric went so fast that, had it not been for the steel wind-shield
in front, Mr. Damon, at any rate, would have been short of breath.

"This is going some!" he cried to Tom. The lad nodded grimly, and
shoved the controller handle over to the last notch. Then came a bad
stretch and they had to slow down again. As they were about out of it
there came a little flash of fire and the motor stopped.

"Bless my overshoes!" cried Mr. Damon. "What's that; a fuse blown out?"

"No," replied Tom, with a puzzled air. "But something has gone wrong."
Hastily he got out, and made an examination. He found it was only one
of the unimportant wires which had short-circuited, and it was soon
adjusted. But they had lost five precious minutes. Tom tried to make up
for lost time, but came to a hill a little later, and this reduced
their speed.

"Do you think we can make it before twelve?" asked Mr. Damon anxiously.
"We've got to, if we're to get back before three, Tom."

"I'll try," was the calm answer, and Tom's jaw was shut still more
tightly. Once again came more favorable roads and pushing the car to
the limit the occupants were rejoiced, a little later, as they topped a
hill, to come in sight of a fairly large city.

"There's Clayton!" cried Mr. Damon.

Ten minutes later they were rolling through the main street, and as
they stopped in front of the bank, the noon whistles blew shrill and
noisily.

"You did it, Tom!" cried Mr. Damon, springing out with the valise of
securities. "Now be ready for the return trip. I'll be with you as soon
as possible."

He went up the bank steps three at a time, like some boy instead of an
elderly man. Tom looked after him for a second and then got down to oil
up his car, and make some adjustments that had rattled loose from the
rough road. Unmindful of the curious throng that gathered he crawled
under the machine with his oil-can.

He had finished his work, and was back in his seat, ready to start, but
Mr. Damon had not reappeared.

"It's taking him a good while to get that cash," thought Tom.  "Maybe
the securities were no good."

But, a few minutes later, Mr. Damon came hurrying from the bank. The
valise he carried seemed much heavier than when he went in.

"It's all right, Tom," he said. "I've got it. Now for the trip home,
and I hope we don't have any accidents. It took longer than I thought
to check over the bonds and receipt for them. But I've got the cash.
Now to save the bank!"

He took his place beside the young inventor, holding the valise between
his knees, while Tom turned on the power and sent his car dashing down
the street, and toward the road that led to Shopton.




CHAPTER XIX

STOPPED ON THE ROAD


"Did Mr. Chase make any objection to giving you the cash?" asked Tom,
as he shoved the controller over another notch, and caused the motor to
make a higher note in its song of speed.

"Oh, no, he was very nice about it," replied Mr. Damon. "He said he
hoped our bank would pull through. Said if we needed more cash we could
have it."

It was nearly one o'clock, and they had the worst part of the journey
yet to go. Thirty miles of stiff roads lay between them and Shopton,
the last five and the first five being fairly good, with, here and
there, soft spots.

Up hill and down went the electric auto. At every opportunity Tom let
out all the speed he could draw from the motor, but there were many
times when he had to slow down. He had just made the ascent of a steep
hill, and was turning into a fairly good road, skirting the edge of a
steep cliff, when there came a sharp report.

"Bless my soul! That's a fuse, I'm sure of it!" cried Mr. Damon.

"No," announced Tom, as he quickly shut off the power. "It's a
puncture. One of the inner tubes of the tire has been pierced. I was
afraid of that tube."

"What have you got to do; put on a new tire?" asked Mr. Damon.

"No, I'm going to put on a new wheel. I carry two spare ones with tires
all ready inflated. It won't take long."

But the process of changing wheels consumed more time than Tom
anticipated for the nut was stuck, and he and Mr. Damon had to exert
all their strength before they could loosen it. When the new wheel was
in place ten minutes had been lost.

"Hold on now, I'm going to speed her!" cried Tom, when they were once
more in their seats, and speed the machine he did. The road was rough,
but despite this the lad turned on almost full power. Over the bumps
they went, around curves and into rain-washed ruts careening from side
to side, and throwing Mr. Damon about, as he expressed it afterward,
"like a bean inside of a football." As for the young inventor his grasp
of the steering wheel, and the manner in which he could brace himself
against the foot pedals, held him more firmly in place. On and on they
rushed, covering mile after mile, and approaching Shopton where so much
depended on their arrival.

Good and bad stretches of the road alternated, but now that Tom had
seen of what mettle his car was made, he did not spare it as much as he
had on the first trip. He saw that his machine would stand hard knocks,
and the way the battery and motor was behaving was a joy to him. He
knew that if he could make that eighty-mile run in safety he stood a
good chance of winning the prize, for no harder test could have been
devised.

But the race was still far from won. There was a particularly unsafe
stretch of road yet to be covered, and then would come a smooth highway
into Shopton.

"Ten miles more," observed Mr. Damon, snapping shut his big gold watch.
"Ten miles more, and it's a quarter of two now. We ought to be there at
a quarter after, and that will be in good time, eh, Tom?"

"I think so, but I don't know about this piece of road we're coming to.
It seems worse than when we passed over it this morning."

As he spoke the auto began to slow up, for the wheels had struck some
heavy sand, and it was necessary to reduce the current. Tom turned back
the controller handle, but watched with eager eyes for a sign that the
roadbed was harder, so that he could increase speed.

As the car turned around a curve, passing through a lonely stretch of
country, with woods on either side of the highway, Tom glancing up,
uttered a cry of astonishment.

"What's the matter; something gone wrong?" asked his companion.

For answer Tom pointed. There, just ahead of them, was a big load of
hay, and it was evident that the driver, was in no particular hurry.

"We can't pass that without getting in over our hubs!" cried Tom. "If
we turn out the side ditches are so soft that we'll need help to pull
out, and the road is so narrow for several miles that we'll have to
trail along behind that fellow."

"Bless my check book!" cried Mr. Damon. "Are we going to lose, after
all, on account of a load of hay? No, I'll buy it from him first, at
double the market price, tip it over, set fire to it, toss it in the
ditch, and then we can go past!"

"Maybe that will answer," retorted Tom, smiling grimly.

He put on a little more speed, and was soon close up behind the load of
hay, ringing his electric bell as a warning.

"I say!" called Mr. Damon to the unseen driver, "can't you turn out and
let us pass?"

"Ha! Hum! Wa'al I guess not!" came the answer, in unmistakable farmer's
accents. "You automobile fellers is too gol-hanged smart, racin' along
th' roads. I've got just as good a right here as you fellers have, by
heck!" The driver did not show himself.

"We know that," responded Tom, as quickly as he could, for he did not
want to anger the man. "But our machine is so heavy that if we turn
into the ditch I'm afraid we'll be mired."

"Huh! So'll I," was the retort from the unseen driver.. "Think I want
t' spile my load of hay?"

"But you have wide tires on, and you wouldn't sink in far," answered
the young inventor. "Besides, it's very necessary that we get past. A
great deal depends on our speed."

"So it does on mine," was the reply. "Ef I git t' market late I'll have
t' stay all night, an' spend money on a hotel bill."

"I'll pay it! I'll pay your bill if you'll only pull out!" cried Mr.
Damon. "I'll give you a hundred dollars!"

He suddenly ceased speaking. From the bushes along the road sprang
several ragged, masked figures. Each one, aiming his weapon at Tom,
said in a low voice, that could not have been heard by the driver of
the hay wagon:

"Slow up your machine, young feller! We want to speak with you, and
don't you make a loud noise, or it won't be healthy for you!"

"Why of all the--!" began Mr. Damon, but another of the footpads
leveling his weapon at the eccentric man growled:

"Dry up, if you don't want to get shot!"

Mr. Damon subsided. Discretion was very plainly the better part of
valor. Tom had shut off the current. The load of hay continued on
ahead. Tom thought perhaps the driver of it might have been in
collusion with the thieves, to cause the auto to slow up.

"What do you want with us?" asked the young inventor, trying to speak
calmly, but finding it a hard task, with a revolver pointed at him.

"You know what we want," exclaimed the leader, in a low voice.  "We
want that cash you got from the bank, and we're going to have it! Come,
now, shell out!" and he advanced toward the automobile.




CHAPTER XX

ON TIME


Close around the electric auto crowded the members of the hold-up gang.
Their eyes seemed to glare through the holes in their black masks.
Instantly Tom thought of the other occasion when he was halted by
masked figures. Could these, by any possibility, be the same
individuals? Was this a trick of Andy Foger and his cronies?

Tom tried to pierce through the disguises. Clearly the persons were
men--not boys--and they wore the ragged clothes of tramps.  Also, there
was an air of dogged determination about them.

"Well, are you going to shell out?" asked the leader, taking a step
nearer, "or will we have to take it?"

"Bless my very existence! You don't mean to say that you're going to
take the money--I mean how do you know we have any money?" and Mr.
Damon hastily corrected himself. "What right have you to stop us in
this way? Don't you know that every minute counts? We are in a hurry."

"I know it," spoke the leading masked figure with a laugh. "I know you
have considerable money in that shebang, and I know what you hope to do
with it, prevent the run on the Shopton National Bank. But we need that
money as much as some other people and, what's more, we're going to
have it! Come on, shell out!"

"Oh, why didn't we bring a gun!" lamented Mr. Damon in a low voice to
Tom. "Isn't there anything we can do? Can't you give them an electric
shock, Tom?"

"I'm afraid not. If it wasn't for that hay wagon we could turn on the
current and make a run for it. But we'd only go into the ditch if we
tried to pass now."

The load of hay was down the road, but as Tom looked he noticed a
curious thing. It seemed to be nearer than it was when the attack of
the masked men came. The wagon actually seemed to have backed up. Once
more the thought came to the lad that possibly the load of fodder might
be one of the factors on which the thieves counted. They might have
used it to make the auto halt, and the man, or men, on it were probably
in collusion with the footpads. There was no doubt about it, the load
of hay was coming nearer, backing up instead of moving away. Tom
couldn't understand it. He gave a swift glance at the robbers. They had
not appeared to notice this, or, if they had, they gave no sign.

"Then we can't do anything," murmured Mr. Damon.

"I don't see that we can," replied the young inventor in a low voice.

"And the money we worked so hard to get won't do the bank any good,"
and Mr. Damon sighed.

"It's tough luck," agreed Tom.

"Come now, fork over that cash!" called the leader, advancing still
closer. "None of that talk between you there. If you think you can work
some trick on us you're mistaken. We're desperate men, and we're well
armed. The first show of resistance you make, and we shoot--get that,
fellows?" he added to his followers, and they nodded grimly.

"Well," remarked Mr. Damon with an air of submission, "I only want to
warn you that you are acting illegally, and that you are perpetrating a
desperate crime."

"Oh, we know that all right," answered one of the men, and Tom gave a
start. He was sure he had heard that voice before. He tried to remember
it--tried to penetrate the disguise--but he could not.

"I'll give you ten seconds more to hand over that bag of money," went
on the leader. "If you don't, we'll take it and some of you may get
hurt in the process."

There seemed nothing else to do. With a white face, but with anger
showing in his eyes Mr. Damon reached down to get the valise. Tom had
retained his grip of the steering wheel, and the starting lever. He
hoped, at the last minute, he might see a chance to dash away, and
escape, but that load of hay was in the path. He noted that it was now
quite near, but the thieves paid no attention to it.

Tom might have reversed the power, and sent his machine backward, but
he could not see to steer it if he went in that direction, and he would
soon have gone into the ditch. There was nothing to do save to hand
over the cash, it seemed.

Mr. Damon had the bag raised from the car, and the leader of the
thieves was reaching up for it, when there came a sudden interruption.

From the load of hay there sounded a fusillade of pistol shots,
cracking out with viciousness. This was instantly followed by the
appearance of three men who came running from around the load of hay,
down the road toward the thieves. Each man carried a pitchfork, and as
they ran, one of the trio shouted:

"Right at 'em, boys! Jab your hay forks clean through the scoundrels!
By Heck, I guess we'll show 'em we know how t' tackle a hold-up gang as
well as the next fellow! Right at 'em now!  Charge 'em! Stick your
forks right through 'em!"  Again there sounded a fusillade of pistol
shots.

The thieves turned as one man, and glanced at the relief so
unexpectedly approaching. They gave one look at the three determined
looking farmers, with their sharp, glittering pitchforks, and then,
without a word, they turned and fled, leaping into the bushes that
lined the roadway. The underbrush closed after them and they were
hidden from sight.

On came the three farmers, waving their effective weapons, the pistol
shots still ringing out from the load of hay. Tom could not understand
it, and could see no one firing--could detect no smoke.

"Are they gone? Did they rob ye?" asked the foremost of the trio, a
burly, grizzled farmer. "Bust my buttons, but I guess we skeered 'em
all right!"

"Bless my shoe buttons, but you certainly have!" cried Mr. Damon,
descending from the automobile, and wringing the hand of the farmer,
while Tom, thrust the bag of money under his legs and waited further
developments. The pistol shots rang out until one of the men called:

"That'll do, Bub! We've skeered 'em like Mrs. Zenoby's pet cat!  You
needn't crack that whip any more."

"Whip!" cried Tom. "Was that a whip?"

"That's what it was," explained the leading farmer. "Bub Armstrong, my
nephew, can crack it to beat th' band," and as if in proof of this
there emerged from behind the load of hay a small lad, carrying a large
whip, to which he gave a few trial cracks, like pistol shots, as if to
show his ability.

"It's all right, Bub," his uncle assured him. "We made 'em run."

"But I don't exactly understand," spoke Mr. Damon. "I thought you were
in league with those thieves, stopping us as you did with your big
load."

"So did I," admitted Tom.

"Ha! Ha!" laughed the farmer. "That's a pretty good joke.  Excuse me
for laughin'. My name's Lyon, Jethro Lyon, of Salina Township, an'
these is my two sons, Ade and Burt. You see we're on our way to
Shopton, an' my nephew, Bub, he went along. We thought you was some of
them sassy automobile fellers at first when you hollered to us you
wanted to pass. Then when we looked back, we seen them burglars goin'
t' rob you, at least that's what we suspicioned," and he paused
suggestively.

"That was it," Tom said.

"Wa'al, when we seen that, we held a sort of consultation on thet load
of hay, where they couldn't see us. It was so big you know," he
needlessly explained. "Wa'al, we calcalated we could help you, so I
jest quietly backed up, until we was near enough.  I told Bub to take
the long whip, an' crack it for all he was wuth, so's it would sound
like reinforcements approachin' with guns, an' he done it."

"He certainly done it," added Burt.

"Wa'al," resumed Mr. Lyon, "then me an my sons we jest slipped down off
the front seat, an' come a runnin' with our pitchforks.  I reckoned
them burglars would run when they see us an' heard us, an' they done
so."

"Yep, they done so," added Ade, like an echo.

"I can't tell you how much obliged we are to you," said Mr. Damon. "We
have sixty thousand dollars in this valise, and they would have had it
in another minute, and the bank would have failed."

"Sixty thousand dollars!" gasped Mr. Lyon, and his sons and nephew
echoed the words. Mr. Damon briefly explained about the money, and he
and the young inventor again thanked their rescuers, who had so
unexpectedly, and in such a novel manner, put the thieves to flight.

"An' you've got t' git t' Shopton before three o'clock with thet cash?"
asked Mr. Lyon.

"That's what we hoped to do," replied Tom "but I'm afraid we won't now.
It's half past two, and--"

"Don't say another word," interrupted Mr. Lyon. "I know what ye mean.
My hay's in the road. But don't let that worry ye none.  I'll pull out
of your road in a jiffy, an' if we do go down in th' ditch, why we can
throw off part of th' load, lighten th' wagon, an' pull out again.
You've got t' hustle if ye git t' Shopton by three o'clock."

"I can do it with a clear road," declared Tom, confidently.

"Then ye'll have th' clear road," Mr. Lyon assured him. "Come boys,
let's git th' hay t' one side."

The farmers pulled into the ditch. As they had feared the wagon went in
almost to the hubs, but they did not mind, and, even as Tom and Mr.
Damon shot past them, they fell to work tossing off part of the fodder,
to lighten the wagon. The young inventor and his companion waved a
grateful farewell to them as they fairly tore past, for Tom had turned
on almost the full current.

"Do you suppose that was the Happy Harry gang, or some members of it
who were not captured and sent to jail?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I don't believe so," answered the lad, shaking his head.  "Maybe they
didn't really want to rob us. Perhaps they only wanted to delay us so
we wouldn't get to the bank on time."

"Bless my top knot, you may be right!" cried Mr. Damon.

Further conversation became difficult, as they struck a rough part of
the road, where the vehicle swayed and jolted to an alarming degree.
But Tom never slackened pace. On and on they rushed, Mr. Damon
frequently looking at his watch.

"We've got twenty minutes left," he remarked as they came out on the
smooth stretch of road, that led directly into Shopton.

Then Tom turned all the reserve power into the motor. The machinery
almost groaned as the current surged into the wires, but it took up the
load, and the electric car, swaying more than ever, dashed ahead with
its burden of wealth.

Now they were in the town, now speeding down the street leading to the
bank. One or two policemen shouted after them, for they were violating
the speed laws, but it was no time to stop for that. On and on they
dashed.

They came in sight of the bank. A long line of persons was still in
front. They seemed more excited than in the morning, for the hour of
three was approaching, and they feared the bank would close its doors,
never to open them again.

"The run is still on," observed Mr. Damon.

"But it will soon be over," predicted Tom.

Some news of the errand of the automobile must have penetrated the
crowd, for as Tom swung past the front entrance to the bank, to go up
the rear alley, he was greeted with a cheer.

"They've got the cash!" a man cried. "I'm satisfied now. I won't draw
out my deposit."

"I want to see the cash before I'll believe it," said another.

Tom slowed up to make the turn into the alley. As he did so he glanced
across the street to the new bank. In the window stood Andy Foger and
his father. There was a look of surprise on their faces as they saw the
arrival of the powerful car, and, Tom fancied, also a look of chagrin.

Up the alley went the car, police keeping the crowd from following. The
porter was at the door. So, also, was Mr. Pendergast and Mr. Swift,
while some of the other officers were grouped behind them.

"Did you get the money?" gasped the president.

"We did," answered Tom. "Are we on time, Dad?"

"Just on time, my boy! They're paying out the last of the cash now!
You're on time, thank fortune!"




CHAPTER XXI

OFF TO THE BIG RACE


From their task of handing out money to eager depositors, the wearied
tellers looked up as Tom and Mr. Damon entered with the big valise
crammed full of money. It was opened, and the bundles of bills turned
out on a table.

"Perhaps you'd better make an announcement to the crowd, Mr.
Pendergast," suggested Mr. Swift. "Tell them we now have cash enough to
meet all demands, and that the bank will be kept open until every one
is paid."

"I will," agreed the aged president. His announcement was received with
cheers, and had exactly the effect the inventor hoped it would.

Many, learning that the bank was safe, and that they could have their
money whenever they wanted it, concluded not to withdraw it, thus
saving the interest. Scores in the waiting crowd turned out of line and
went home. Their example was contagious, and, though many still
remained to get their deposits, the run was broken. Only part of the
sixty thousand dollars Tom and Mr. Damon had brought through after a
race with time, was needed. But had it not been for the moral effect of
the cash arriving as it did, the bank would have failed.

"You have a great car, Tom Swift," complimented Mr. Pendergast, when
the excitement had somewhat cooled down, and the story of the hold-up
had been told.

"I think so myself," agreed the young inventor modestly. "I must get
ready for the races now."

"And as for those farmers, I think I'll send them a reward," went on
the president. "They deserve something for the trouble they had with
the load of hay. I certainly shall send them a reward," which he did,
and a substantial one, too.

Of course the hold-up was at once reported to the police after the run
had quieted down, but Chief Simonson surprised Tom by saying that he
had expected it.

"The gang that held you up," said the police officer, "was one that
escaped from a jail, about twenty miles away. I got a tip after you
left, that they were going to rob you, for, in some way, they learned
about the money you and Mr. Damon were to bring from the bank. The
unfortunate part of it was that the tip I got was to the effect that
the hold-up would take place just outside of Clayton. I telephoned to
the police there, just after you left, and they said they'd send out a
posse. But the gang changed their plans; and held you up near here,
where I wasn't expecting it. But I'll get 'em yet."

Chief Simonson did not arrest the gang, but some other police officers
did, and they were taken back to jail. They were not prosecuted for the
attempted robbery of Tom, as it was considered difficult to fix the
guilt on them, but they received such a long additional sentence for
breaking jail, that it will be many years before they are released.

When Tom reached home that night he found some mail from the officials
of the Touring Club of America. It was to the effect that arrangements
for the big contest had been completed, and that contesting cars must
be on the ground by September first.

"That gives me two weeks yet," thought our hero.

He read further of the regulations covering the race. Each car must
proceed from the home town or city of the owner, and go to the track
under its own power. This was a new regulation, it was stated, and was
adopted to better develop the industry of building electric autos. Two
passengers, or one in addition to the driver, must be carried, it was
stated, and this one would also be expected to be in the car during the
entire race.

Regarding the race proper it was stated that at first it had been
decided to make it a twenty-four hour endurance contest, but that for
certain reasons this was changed, as it was found that few storage
batteries could go this length of time without a number of rechargings.
Therefore the race was to be one for distance--five hundred miles, on
the new Long Island track, and the car first covering that distance
would win. Cars were allowed to change their batteries as often as they
needed to, but all time lost would count against them. There were other
rules and regulations of minor importance.

"Well," remarked Tom, as he read through the circulars, "I must get my
car in shape. It will be quite a trip to Long Island, and I think my
best plan will be to go direct to the cottage we had when we were
building the submarine, and from there proceed to the track. That will
comply with the rules, I think. But who will I get to go with me? I
suppose Mr. Damon or Mr. Sharp will be willing. I'll ask them."

He broached the matter to his two friends that night, and they both
agreed to go to Long Island in the car, though only Mr. Sharp would
accompany Tom in the race. The next two weeks were busy ones for Tom.
He worked night and day over his car, getting it in shape for the big
event.

The young inventor made some changes in his battery, and also adopted a
new gear, which would give greater speed. He also completed the
exterior of the auto, giving it several coats of purple paint and
varnish, so that when it was finished, though it was different in shape
from most autos, it was as fine an appearing car as one could wish. He
arranged to carry two extra wheels, with tires inflated, and, under the
rear seats, or tonneau, as he called it, Tom fitted up a complete
tire-repairing outfit. Mr. Sharp agreed to ride there, and in case
there was need to use more than two spare wheels during the race, the
rubber shoes or inner tubes could be mended while the car was swinging
around the track.

Mr. Damon would ride in front with Tom on the cross-country trip, and
occasionally relieve him at steering, or would help to manage the
electrical connections. Spare fuses, extra parts, wires and different
things he thought he might need, the young inventor stored in his car.
He also found means to install a small additional storage battery, to
give added power in case of emergency.

Tom learned from the racing officials that if he made a trip from
Shopton to the cottage on the coast, near the city of Atlantis, and
later traveled from there to the track, it would fulfill the conditions
of the contest.

Finally all was in readiness, and one morning, having spent the better
part of the night going over his machine, to see that he had forgotten
nothing, Tom invited Mr. Damon and Mr. Sharp to enter, and prepare for
the trip to Long Island.

"Well, Tom, I certainly hope you win that race," remarked Mrs. Baggert,
as she stood in the doorway, waving a farewell.

"If I do I'll buy you a pair of diamond earrings to match the diamond
ring I gave you from the money I got from the wreck," promised the lad
with a laugh.

"An' ef yo' sees dat Andy Foger," added Eradicate Sampson, while he
rubbed the long ears of Boomerang, his mule, "ef yo' sees him, jest run
ober him once or twice fer mah sake, Mistah Swift."

"I'll do it for my own, too," agreed Tom.

The youth shook hands with his father, who wished him good luck, and
then, after a final look at his car, he climbed to his seat, and turned
on the power. There was a low hum from the motor and the electric
started off. Would it return a winner or loser of the big race?




CHAPTER XXII

IN A DITCH


Through the streets of Shopton went Tom Swift and his friends.  News of
the big contest the young inventor was about to take part in, had
circulated around town, and there were not wanting many to wish him
good luck. The lad responded smilingly to the farewells he received. As
they passed the bank, Ned Newton came out on the steps.

"Wish I was going along," he called.

"So do I," replied Tom. "How's everything? Is the bank all right since
the run?" for he had not had time to pay much attention to the
institution since his memorable race against time, to get the money.

"Stronger and better than ever," was Ned's answer, as he came to the
curb, where Tom slowed up. "I hear," he added in a whisper, "that the
other fellows are going out of business--Foger and his crowd you know.
They loaned money on unsecured notes to make a good showing, and now
they can't get it back. But we're all right. Hope you win the race."

"So do I."

"What will a certain person do while you're away?" went on Ned, with a
wink.

"I don't know what you mean," replied Tom, trying not to blush.  "Do
you mean my dad or Mrs. Baggert?"

"Neither, you old hypocrite you! I meant Miss Mary Nestor."

"Oh, hadn't you heard?" inquired Tom innocently. "She is going to Long
Island to visit some friends, and she'll be at the race."

"You lucky dog," murmured Ned with a laugh, as he went into the bank.

Once more the electric auto started off, and was soon on the quiet
country road, where Tom speeded it up moderately. He hoped to be able
to make the entire distance to the shore cottage on the single charge
of current he had put into the battery at home, and, as there was no
special need for haste, he wanted to save his power. The machine was
running smoothly, and seemed able to make a long race against time.

The travelers ate lunch that day at Pendleton, a town some distance
from Shopton. They had covered a substantial part of their trip. After
a brief rest they started on again. Tom had planned to spend two days
and one night on the road, hoping to be able to reach the shore cottage
on the evening of the second day.  There, after recharging the battery,
he would spend a night, or two, and proceed to the track, ready for the
race.

They found the roads fairly good, with bad stretches here and there,
which made it necessary for them to slow down. This delayed them, and
they found the shadows lengthening, and darkness approaching, when they
were still several miles from Burgfield, where they intended to sleep.

"Will it be all right to travel at night?" asked Mr. Damon, a bit
nervously.

"Why, are you thinking of hold-up men?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"No, but I was wondering about the condition of the roads," replied the
eccentric man. "We don't want to run into a rock, or collide with
something."

"I guess this will light up the road far enough in advance, so that we
can see where we are going," suggested Tom, as he switched on the
powerful electric search-light. Though it was not dark enough to
illuminate the highway to the best advantage, the powerful gleam shone
dazzlingly in front of the swiftly moving auto.

"I guess that will show up every pebble in the road," commented the
balloonist. "It's very powerful."

Tom turned off the light, as, until it was darker, he could see to
better advantage unaided by it. He slowed down the speed somewhat, but
was still going at a good rate.

"There's a bridge somewhere about here," remarked the lad, when they
had gone on a mile further. "I remember seeing it on my road map. It's
not very strong, and we'll have to run slow over it."

"Bless my gizzard, I hope we don't go through it!" cried Mr. Damon. "Is
your car very heavy, Tom?"

"Not heavy enough to break the bridge. Ah, there it is. Guess I'll turn
on the light so we can see what we're doing."

Just ahead of them loomed up the super-structure of a bridge, and Tom
turned the searchlight switch. At the instant he did so, whether he did
not keep a steady hand on the steering wheel, or whether the auto went
into a rut from which it could not be turned, did not immediately
develop, but the car suddenly shot from the straight road, and swerved
to one side. There was a lurch, and the front wheels sank down.

"Look out! We're going into the river!" yelled Mr. Damon.

Tom jammed on the brakes and shut off the current. The auto came to a
sudden stop. The young inventor turned the searchlight downward, to
illuminate the ground directly in front of the car.

"Are we in the river?" asked Mr. Sharp.

"No," replied Tom in great chagrin. "We're in a muddy ditch.  One at
the side of the road. Wheels in over the hubs! There should have been a
guard rail here. We're stuck for fair!"




CHAPTER XXIII

THE POWER GONE


"Bless my overshoes!" cried Mr. Damon. "Stuck in the mud, eh?"

"Hard and fast," added Tom, in disgust.

"What's to be done?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"I should say we'll have to stay here until daylight, and wait for some
other auto to come along and pull us out," was Mr. Damon's opinion.
"It's might unpleasant, too, for there doesn't seem to be any place
around here where we can spend the night in any kind of comfort. If we
had the submarine or the airship, now, it wouldn't so much matter."

"No, and this won't matter a great deal," remarked the young inventor
quickly. "We'll soon be out of this, but it will be hard work."

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Sharp.

"I mean that we've got to pull ourselves out of this mud hole,"
explained the lad, as he prepared to descend. "I was afraid something
like this would happen, so I came prepared for it. I've got ropes and
pulleys with me, in the car. We'll fasten the rope to the machine,
attach one pulley to the bridge, another to the car, and I guess we can
get out of the mud. We'll try, anyhow."

"Well, I must say you looked pretty far ahead," complimented Mr. Damon.

From a box under the tonneau Tom took out a thin but strong rope and
two compound pulleys, which would enable considerable force to be
applied. Mr. Sharp detached one of the powerful oil lamps, and the
three travelers took a look at the auto. It was indeed deep in the mud
and it seemed like a hopeless task to try to get it out unaided. But
Tom insisted that they could do it, and the rope was soon attached, the
hook of one pulley being slipped around one of the braces of the bridge.

"Now, all together!" cried the lad, as he and his friends grasped the
long rope. They gave a great heave. At first it seemed like pulling on
a stone wall. The rope strained and the pulleys creaked.

"I--guess--we--will--pull--the--bridge--over!" gasped Mr. Sharp.

"Something's got to give way!" puffed Tom. "Now, once more! All
together!"

Suddenly they felt the rope moving. The pulleys creaked still more and,
by the light of the lamp, they could see that the auto was slowly being
pulled backward, out of the mud, and onto the hard road. In a few
minutes it was ready to proceed again.

The rope and pulleys were put away, and, after Tom had made an
examination of the car to see that it had sustained no damage, they
were off again, making good time to the hotel in Burgfield, where they
spent the night. They had an early breakfast, and, as Tom went out to
the barn to look at his car, he saw it surrounded by a curious throng
of men and boys. One of the boys was turning some of the handles and
levers.

"Here! Quit that!" yelled Tom, and the meddlesome lad leaped down in
fright. "Do you want to start the car and have it smash into
something?" demanded the young inventor.

"Aw, nothin' happened," retorted the lad. "I pulled every handle on it,
an' it didn't move."

"Good reason," murmured Tom, for he had taken the precaution to remove
a connecting plug, without which the machine could not be started.

The three were soon under way again, and covered many miles over the
fine country roads, the weather conditions being delightful. On inquiry
they found that by taking an infrequently used highway, they could save
several miles. It was over an unoccupied part of country, rather wild
and desolate, but they did not mind that.

They were whizzing along, talking of Tom's chances for winning the race
when, after climbing a slight grade, the auto came to a sudden stop on
the summit.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Sharp. "Why are you stopping here, Tom?"

"I didn't stop," was the surprising answer, and the lad shoved the
starting lever back and forth.

But there was no response. There was no hum from the motor. The machine
was "dead."

"That's queer," murmured the young inventor.

"Maybe a fuse blew out," suggested Mr. Damon, that seeming to be his
favorite form of trouble.

"If it had you'd have known it," remarked Mr. Sharp.

"There's plenty of current in the battery, according to the registering
gauge," murmured the lad. "I can't understand it."  He reversed the
current, thinking the wires might have become crossed, but the machine
would move neither backward nor forward, yet the dial indicated that
there was enough power stored away to send it a hundred miles or more.

"Perhaps the dial hand has become caught," suggested Mr. Sharp.  "That
sometimes happens on a steam gauge, and indicates a high pressure when
there isn't any. Hit it slightly, and see if the hand swings back."

Tom did so. At once the hand fell to zero, indicating that there was
not an ampere of current left. The battery was exhausted, but this fact
had not been indicated on the gauge.

"I see now!" cried Tom. "It was those fellows at the hotel barn! They
monkeyed with the mechanism, short circuited the battery, and jammed
the gauge so I couldn't tell when my power was gone. If I had known
there wasn't enough to carry us I could have recharged the battery at
the hotel. But I figured that I had enough current for the entire trip,
and so there would have been, if it hadn't leaked away. Now we're in a
pretty pickle."

"Bless my hat band!" cried Mr. Damon. "Does that mean we can't move?"

"Guess that's about it," answered Mr. Sharp, and Tom nodded.

"Well, why can't we go on to some place where they sell electricity,
and get enough to take us where we want to go?" asked the odd
character, whose ideas of machinery were somewhat hazy.

"The only trouble is we can't carry the heavy car with us," replied
Tom. "It's too big to pick up and take to a charging station."

"Then we've got to wait until some one comes along with a team of
horses, and tows us in," commented Mr. Sharp. "And that will be some
time, on this lonely road."

Tom shook his head despondently. He went all over the car again, but
was forced to the first conclusion, that the reserve current had leaked
away, in consequence of the meddling prank of the youth at the hotel.
The situation was far from pleasant, and the delay would seriously
interfere with their plans.

Suddenly, as Tom was pacing up and down the road, he heard from afar, a
peculiar humming sound. He paused to listen.

"Trolley car," observed Mr. Sharp. "Maybe one of us could go somewhere
on the trolley and get help. There it is," and he pointed to the
electric vehicle, moving along about half a mile away, at the foot of a
gentle slope.

At the sight of the car Tom uttered a cry. "I have it!" he exclaimed.
"None of us need go for help! It's right at hand!" His companions
looked curiously, as the young inventor pointed triumphantly to the
fast disappearing electric.




CHAPTER XXIV

ON THE TRACK


"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Damon. "Will the electric trolley pull us
to a charging station?"

"No, we'll not need to go to a station," answered the youth.  "If we
can get my car to the trolley tracks I can charge my battery from
there. And I think we can push the auto near enough.  It's down hill,
and I've got a long wire so we won't have to go too close."

"Good!" cried Mr. Sharp. "But attach the rope to the front of the car,
Tom. Mr. Damon and I will pull it. You'll have to ride in it to steer
it."

"We can take turns at riding," was Tom's answer, for he did not want
his companions to do all the work.

"Nonsense! You ride," said Mr. Damon. "You're lighter than we are, and
can steer better. It won't be any trouble at all to pull this car down
hill."

It proved to be an easy task, and in a short time the "dead" auto was
near enough to the electric line to permit Tom to run his charging wire
over to it.

"Why bless my soul!" exclaimed Mr. Damon, looking up. "There's no
overhead trolley wire. The car must run on storage batteries."

"Third rail, more likely," was the opinion of Mr. Sharp and so it
proved.

"I can charge from either the third rail or the trolley wire," declared
Tom, who was insulating his hands in rubber gloves, and getting his
wires ready. In a short time he had the proper connections made, and
the much-needed current was soon flowing into the depleted battery, or
batteries, for there were several sets, though the whole source of
motive power was usually referred to as a "storage battery."

"How long will it take?" asked Mr. Damon.

"About two hours," answered the lad. "We'll probably have to disconnect
our wires several times, whenever a trolley car comes past. By my
system I can recharge the battery very quickly.

"Do you suppose the owners of the road will make any objection?" asked
the balloonist.

"I'm going to pay for the current I use," explained the young inventor.
"I have a meter which tells how much I take."

The hum of an approaching car was heard, and Tom took the wires from
the third rail. The car came to a stop opposite the automobile, the
passengers, as well as the crew, looking curiously at the queer racing
machine. Tom explained to the conductor what was going on, and asked
the fare-collector to notify those in charge of the power station that
all current used would be paid for. The conductor said this would be
satisfactory, he was sure, and the car proceeded, Tom resuming the
charging of his battery.

Allowing plenty of reserve power to accumulate, and making sure that
the gauge would not stick again, and deceive him, the owner of the
speedy electric was soon ready to proceed again. They had been delayed
a little over three hours, for they had to make several shifts, as the
cars came past.

They reached their shore cottage late that night, and, after seeing
that the runabout was safely locked in the big shed where the submarine
had been built, they all went to bed, for they were very tired.

Tom sent word, the next day, to the managers of the race, that he would
be on hand at the time stipulated, and announced that he had made part
of the trip, as required, under the power of the auto itself.

The next day was spent in overhauling the machinery, tightening up some
loose bearings, oiling different parts, and further charging the
battery. Tires were looked to, and the ones on the spare wheels were
gone over to prepare for any emergency that might arise when the race
was started.

On the third day, Tom, Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon, leaving the cottage
completed the trip to Havenford, Long Island, where the new track had
been constructed.

They reached the place shortly before noon, and, if they had been
unaware of the location they could not have missed it, for there were
many autos speeding along the road toward the scene of the race, which
would take place the following day.

Several electric cars passed Tom and his friends, whizzing swiftly by,
but the young inventor was not going to show off his speed until the
time came. Besides, he did not want to run any risks of an accident.
But some of the contestants seemed anxious for impromptu "brushes," and
more than one called to our hero to "speed up and let's see what she
can do." But Tom smiled, and shook his head.

There were many gasolene and some steam autos going out to the new
track, which was considered a remarkable piece of engineering. It was
in the shape of an octagon, and the turns were considered very safe. It
was a five mile track, and to complete the race it would be necessary
to make a hundred circuits.

Through scores of autos Tom and his friends threaded their way, the
young inventor keeping a watchful eye on the various types of machine
with which he would soon have to compete.

There were many kinds. Some were larger and some smaller than his. Many
obviously carried very large batteries, but whether they had the speed
or not was another question. Some, in spurts, seemed to Tom, to be
fully as fast as his own, and he began to have some doubts whether he
would win the race.

"But I'm not going to give up until the five hundredth mile is
finished," he thought, grimly.

They were now in sight of the track, and noted many machines speeding
around it.

"Go on in and try your car, Tom," urged Mr. Sharp.

"Yes, do," added Mr. Damon. "Let's see how it travels."

"I will, after I notify the proper officials that I have arrived,"
decided the lad.

The formalities were soon complied with. Tom received his entry card,
after paying the fee, made affidavit that he had completed the entire
trip from home under his own power, save for the little stretch when
the car was pulled, which did not count against him, and was soon ready
to go on the track. Only electric cars were allowed there.

As the young inventor guided his latest effort in the machine line onto
the big track there were murmurs of surprise from the throngs.

"That's a queer machine," said one.

"Yes, but it looks speedy," was another's opinion.

"There's the car for my money," added a third, pointing to a big red
electric which was certainly whizzing around the track.  Tom noted the
red car. Behind it was a green one, also moving at a fast rate of speed.

"Those will be my nearest rivals," thought the lad, as he guided his
car onto the track. A moment later he was sending the auto ahead at
moderate speed, while the other contestants looked at the new arrival,
as if trying to discover whether in it they would have a dangerous
competitor.




CHAPTER XXV

WINNING THE PRIZE


After making two circuits of the track at moderate speed, Tom turned on
more power, deciding to see how the machine would behave on the turns,
going at a fast speed. As it happened he forged ahead just as the big
red car was coming up behind him.  The driver of it took this for a
challenge and threw his controller handle forward.

"Come on!" he cried to our hero, when even with him.

Tom did not want to decline the invitation, and the impromptu race was
under way. Soon the green car came rushing up, and for two miles the
three kept almost in line. It was evident that neither the green nor
the red car drivers wanted to "open out," until they saw Tom do so.

He was willing to oblige them, and suddenly increased his speed. They
did the same, and went ahead of him. Then Tom turned on a little more
juice and got the lead, but the two men were right after him, and they
see-sawed like this for two more miles.  Then, with a cry the man in
the red car, with a sudden burst of speed, left Tom and the green car
behind. The green car was soon up to its rival, but Tom decided he
would not spurt.

The lad and his friends spent the early part of the night in making a
final inspection of the machinery, finding it in good order. Then, with
his head filled with visions of the race on the morrow Tom went to bed.
He had made inquiries, by telephone, of the friends of Miss Nestor, and
learned that she had not arrived.  Tom felt a distinct sense of
disappointment.

The day of the race could not have been better. It was ideal weather,
and conditions at the track were just right. Tom was up early, and went
over every inch of his car with a nervous dread that he might find
something the matter.

The final details of the race were completed, and the entrants given
their numbers and places. Tom drew a good position, not the best, but
he had no reason to complain. Half an hour before the start he again
telephoned to see if Miss Nestor had arrived, but she had not, and it
was with rather gloomy thoughts that the lad entered his car, in which
Mr. Sharp had already taken his place.  Mr. Damon went to the
grandstand to watch the race.

"I wanted Mary to see me win," thought our hero, for he had grimly set
his mind on coming in ahead.

There was a great crowd in the grandstand and scattered about the big
track, which took in a large extent of territory. In spite of its
size--five  miles  around--it  seemed  solidly packed for the entire
length with autos, containing gay parties who had come to see the
electric contest. There was a band playing gay airs, as Tom guided his
machine through the entrance gate, and onto the track.

The judges made their final inspection. There were twenty cars entered,
but it was obvious that some of them would not last long, as their
battery capacity was not large enough. Their owners might have relied
on recharging, but how they could do this under the usual slow system,
and hope to win, Tom could not see. He hoped to run the entire distance
on the single charge, but, if by some accident part of his current
should leak away, his battery could be charged in a short time, by
means of his new system, to run for a considerable distance, or he
could install a new one already charged, for he had two sets on hand.
Tom glanced over the cars of his competitors. They were to be sent away
in batches, the affair being a handicap one, with time allowance for
the smaller powered cars. Tom noted that his car and the red and the
green ones were in the same bunch. Tom's car was purple.

"Are you all ready?" asked the starter of the first group of races.

"Ready," was the low-voiced response.

"Crack!" went the pistol, and there followed the hum of the motors as
the current set the mechanism to work. Forward went the cars, amid the
crash of the band and the cheers of the crowd. The big race was under
way.

"Do you feel nervous, Tom?" asked Mr. Sharp.

"Not a bit," replied the lad.

Around and around the track flew the speedy electrics. It was evident
that the holding of a meet solely for cars of this character had
brought out many new ideas that would be to the benefit of the
industry. Some cars were "freaks" and others, like Tom's, showed a
distinct advance over previous styles of construction.

A five-hundred mile race around a track is rather a monotonous affair,
except for what happens, and things very soon began to happen at this
race.

As Tom had expected, several of the machines were forced to withdraw.
Tire troubles beset some, and others found that they were hopelessly
out of it because of low power, or lack of battery capacity.

Tom determined not to let the red or the green car gain any advantage
over him, and so he watched those two vehicles narrowly. On the other
hand, the red and the green electrics were evidently afraid of one
another and of Tom.

They all three kept pretty much together for the first thirty miles. By
this time the race had settled down into a steady grind. There was some
excitement when the steering gear of one car broke, and it crashed into
the fence, injuring the driver, but the race went on.

The young inventor was holding his own with his two chief rivals, and
was feeling rather proud of his car, when there came from it a report
like a pistol shot.

"Blow out!" yelled Tom desperately, steering to one of the several
repair stations on the inner side of the track. "Be ready with the
extra wheel, Mr. Sharp!"

"Right you are!" cried the balloonist. The car was scarcely stopped
when he had leaped out, and had the lifting jack under the left rear
wheel, where the tire had gone to the bad. He and Tom labored like
Trojans to take off the wheel, and put on the other. They lost five
minutes, and when they got under way again the red and the green cars
were three quarters of a lap ahead.

"You've got to catch them!" declared Sharp firmly.

But the red and the green car drivers saw their advantage, and were
determined to hold it. Tom could not catch them without going his
limit, and he did not want to do this just yet.  However, he had his
opportunity when about two hundred miles had been covered. Both the red
and the green cars had tire troubles, but the red one was delayed
scarcely two minutes as there was a corps of mechanics on hand to take
off the defective wheel and put on another. Still Tom regained his lost
ground, and once more the race between those three cars was even.

In the rear of Tom's car Mr. Sharp was mending the blown-out tire,
though there was still one spare wheel on reserve. Tom, in front,
peered eagerly at the track. Nearly side by side raced the red and the
green cars, the latter somewhat to the rear.

It was at the three hundred and fiftieth mile that Tom had another
blow-out. This time it took a little longer to change the wheel, and
the red and green cars gained a full lap on him. The track was now so
dusty that it was difficult to see the contesting cars. Many had
dropped out, and more were on the verge of giving up.

With the odds against him, Tom started in to regain the lost ground.
Narrowly he watched his electric power. Slowly he saw it dropping.
Would he have enough left to finish out the race? He feared not. The
hours were passing. Still there was a hundred miles yet to go twenty
circuits of the track. Some of the spectators were getting weary and
leaving. The band played spasmodically.

Suddenly Tom saw the red car shoot to one side of the track, toward a
charging station; The green car followed.

"That's our cue!" cried the young inventor "We need a little more
'juice' and now is the time to get it."

The lad ran to the shed where his charging wires were, and they were
connected in a trice. He allowed twenty-five minutes for the charging,
as he knew with his improved battery he could get enough current in
that time to finish the contest. Before the red and green car drivers
had finished installing new batteries, for they could not recharge as
quickly as could our hero, Tom was on the track again. But, in a little
while, his two rivals were after him.

It was now a spectacular race. Around and around swept the three big
cars. All the others were practically out of it. The crowd became
lively airs. Mile after mile was reeled off. The day was passing. Tired
and covered with dust from the track, Tom still sat at the steering
wheel.

"Two laps more!" cried Mr. Sharp, as the starter's pistol gave this
warning. "Can you get away from 'em, Tom?"

The red and the green cars were following closely. The young inventor
looked back and nodded. He turned on more power, almost to the
limit--that he was saving for the final spurt. But after him still came
the two big cars. Suddenly the red car shot ahead, just as the last lap
was beginning. The green tried to follow, but there was a flash of
fire, a loud report, and Tom knew a fuse had blown out. There was no
time for his rival to put in a new one. The race was now between Tom
and the red car. Could the lad catch and pass it?

They were now only a mile from the finish. The red car was three
lengths ahead. With a quick motion Tom turned on the last bit of power.
There seemed to come a roar from his motor and his car shot ahead. It
was on even terms with the red car when what Tom had been fearing for
the last five minutes happened: his fuse blew out.

"Too bad! It's all up with us!" cried Mr. Sharp.

"No!" cried Tom in a ringing voice. "I've got an emergency fuse ready!"
He snapped a switch in place, putting into commission another fuse. The
motor that had lost speed began to pick it up again. Tom had pulled
back the controller handle, but he now shoved it forward again, notch
by notch, until it was at the limit. He had fallen back from the red
car, and the occupants of that, with a yell of triumph, prepared to
cross the line a winner.

But, like a race horse that nerves himself for the last desperate
spurt, Tom's machine fairly leaped ahead. With his hands gripping the
rim of the steering wheel, until it seemed that the bones of his
fingers would protrude, Tom sent his car straight for the finishing
tape. There was a yell from the spectators. Men were standing up,
waving their hats and shouting.  Women were fairly screaming. Mr. Damon
was blessing everything within sight. Mr. Sharp, in his excitement, was
pushing on the back of the front seats as if to shove the car ahead.

Then, as the pistol announced the close of the race, Tom's car, with
what seemed a mighty leap, like a hunter clearing a ditch, forged
ahead, and crossed the line a length in advance of the red car. Tom
Swift had Won.

Amid the cheers of the crowd the lad slowed up, and, at the direction
of the judges, wheeled back to the stand, to receive the prize. A
certified check for three thousand dollars was handed him, and he
received the congratulations of the racing officials. The driver of the
red car also generously praised him.

"You won fair and square," he said, shaking hands with Tom.

The young inventor and his friends drove their car to their shed. As
Tom was descending, weary and begrimed with dust he heard a voice
asking:

"Mayn't I congratulate you also?"

He wheeled around, to confront Mary Nestor, immaculate in a summer gown.

"Why--why," he stammered. "I--I thought you didn't come."

"Oh, yes I did," she answered, laughing. "I wouldn't have missed it for
anything. I arrived late, but I saw the whole race.  Wasn't it
glorious. I'm so glad you won!"  Tom was too, now, but he shrank back
when Miss Nestor held out both daintily gloved hands to him. His hands
were covered with oil and dirt.

"As if I cared for my gloves!" she cried, and she took possession of
his hands, a proceeding to which Tom was nothing loath. "Are you going
to race any more?" she asked, as he walked along by her side, away from
the gathering crowd.

"I don't know," he replied. "My car is speedier than I thought it was.
Perhaps I may enter it in other contests."

But what Tom Swift did later on will be told in another volume, to be
called, "Tom Swift and His Wireless Message; or, The Castaways of
Earthquake Island"--a strange tale of ship-wreck and mystery.

The run back home was made without incident, save for a broken chain,
easily repaired, the day following the race, and Tom later received a
number of invitations to give exhibitions of speed.  Several automobile
manufacturers wanted to secure the rights to his machine, but he said
he desired to consider the matter before acting. He did not forget his
promise to Mrs. Baggert, regarding the diamond earrings, and bought her
the finest pair he could find.

"Come on, Mr. Sharp," proposed Tom, a week or so after the big race,
"let's go for a spin in the airship. I want to see how it feels to be
among the clouds once more," and they were soon soaring aloft.

The new bank, started by Mr. Foger, did not flourish long. It closed
its doors in less than six months, but the old institution was stronger
than ever. Mr. Berg disappeared, and Tom never learned whether the
agent really was the man he had chased, and whose watch charm he tore
loose, though he always had his suspicions. Nor did it ever develop who
crossed the electric wires, so that Tom was so nearly fatally shocked.
Andy Foger disliked our hero more than ever, and on several occasions
caused him not a little trouble, but Tom was able to look after himself.




THE END





This Isn't All!

Would you like to know what became of the good friends you have made in
this book?

Would you like to read other stories continuing their adventures and
experiences, or other books quite as entertaining by the same author?

On the reverse side of the wrapper which comes with this book, you will
find a wonderful list of stories which you can buy at the same store
where you got this book.

Don't throw away the Wrapper

Use it as a handy catalog of the books you want some day to have.  But
in case you do mislay it, write to the Publishers for a complete
catalog.



THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON

Uniform Style of Binding. Individual Colored Wrappers, Every Volume
Complete in Itself.

Every boy possesses some form of inventive genius. Tom Swift is a
bright, ingenious boy and his inventions and adventures make the most
interesting kind of reading.

  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR CYCLE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTORBOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIRELESS MESSAGE
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE DIAMOND MAKERS
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CAVES OF ICE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS SKY RACER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RIFLE
  TOM SWIFT IN THE CITY OF GOLD
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR GLIDER
  TOM SWIFT IN CAPTIVITY
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WIZARD CAMERA
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT SEARCHLIGHT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GIANT CANNON
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS PHOTO TELEPHONE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AERIAL WARSHIP
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS BIG TUNNEL
  TOM SWIFT IN THE LAND OF WONDER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS WAR TANK
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIR SCOUT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS UNDERSEA SEARCH
  TOM SWIFT AMONG THE FIRE FIGHTERS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC LOCOMOTIVE
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS FLYING BOAT
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS GREAT OIL GUSHER
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS CHEST OF SECRETS
  TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRLINE EXPRESS



THE DON STURDY SERIES

By VICTOR APPLETON

  Individual Colored Wrappers and Text Illustrations by
  WALTER S. ROGERS
  Every Volume Complete in Itself.

In the company with his uncles, one a mighty hunter and the other a
noted scientist, Don Sturdy travels far and wide, gaining much useful
knowledge and meeting many thrilling adventures.

DON STURDY ON THE DESERT OF MYSTERY;
  An engrossing tale of the Sahara Desert, of encounters with
  wild animals and crafty Arabs.

DON STURDY WITH THE BIG SNAKE HUNTERS;
  Don's uncle, the hunter, took an order for some of the biggest
  snakes to be found in South America--to be delivered alive!

DON STURDY IN THE TOMBS OF GOLD;
  A fascinating tale of exploration and adventure in the Valley
  of Kings in Egypt.

DON STURDY ACROSS THE NORTH POLE;
  A great polar blizzard nearly wrecks the airship of the
  explorers.

DON STURDY IN THE LAND OF VOLCANOES;
  An absorbing tale of adventure among the volcanos of Alaska.

DON STURDY IN THE PORT OF LOST SHIPS;
  This story is just full of exciting and fearful experiences on
  the sea.

DON STURDY AMONG THE GORILLAS;
  A thrilling story of adventure in darkest Africa. Don is
  carried over a mighty waterfall into the heart of gorilla land.



THE TOM SWIFT SERIES

TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR-CYCLE
  Or Fun and Adventure on the Road

TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR-BOAT
  Or the Rivals of Lake Carlopa

TOM SWIFT AND HIS AIRSHIP
  Or the Stirring Cruise of the Red Cloud

TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT
  Or Under the Ocean for Sunken Treasure

TOM SWIFT AND HIS ELECTRIC RUNABOUT
  Or the Speediest Car on the Road

========================================
========================================

TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT

or

Under the Ocean for Sunken Treasure


by

VICTOR APPLETON




CONTENTS

     I  News of a Treasure Wreck
    II  Finishing the Submarine
   III  Mr. Berg Is Astonished
    IV  Tom Is Imprisoned
     V  Mr. Berg Is Suspicious
    VI  Turning the Tables
   VII  Mr. Damon Will Go
  VIII  Another Treasure Expedition
    IX  Captain Weston's Advent
     X  Trial of the Submarine
    XI  On the Ocean Bed
   XII  For a Breath of Air
  XIII  Off for the Treasure
   XIV  In the Diving Suits
    XV  At the Tropical Island
   XVI  "We'll Race You For It!"
  XVII  The Race
 XVIII  The Electric Gun
   XIX  Captured
    XX  Doomed to Death
   XXI  The Escape
  XXII  At the Wreck
 XXIII  Attacked by Sharks
  XXIV  Ramming the Wreck
   XXV  Home with the Gold




TOM SWIFT AND HIS SUBMARINE BOAT




Chapter One

News of a Treasure Wreck


There was a rushing, whizzing, throbbing noise in the air.  A great
body, like that of some immense bird, sailed along, casting a grotesque
shadow on the ground below.  An elderly man, who was seated on the
porch of a large house, started to his feet in alarm.

"Gracious goodness! What was that, Mrs. Baggert?" he called to a
motherly-looking woman who stood in the doorway.  "What happened?"

"Nothing much, Mr. Swift," was the calm reply "I think that was Tom and
Mr. Sharp in their airship, that's all. I didn't see it, but the noise
sounded like that of the Red Cloud."

"Of course! To be sure!" exclaimed Mr. Barton Swift, the well-known
inventor, as he started down the path in order to get a good view of
the air, unobstructed by the trees. "Yes, there they are," he added.
"That's the airship, but I didn't expect them back so soon. They must
have made good time from Shopton. I wonder if anything can be the
matter that they hurried so?"

He gazed aloft toward where a queerly-shaped machine was circling about
nearly five hundred feet in the air, for the craft, after swooping down
close to the house, had ascended and was now hovering just above the
line of breakers that marked the New Jersey seacoast, where Mr. Swift
had taken up a temporary residence.

"Don't begin worrying, Mr. Swift," advised Mrs. Baggert, the
housekeeper. "You've got too much to do, if you get that new boat done,
to worry."

"That's so. I must not worry. But I wish Tom and Mr. Sharp would land,
for I want to talk to them."

As if the occupants of the airship had heard the words of the aged
inventor, they headed their craft toward earth. The combined aeroplane
and dirigible balloon, a most wonderful traveler of the air, swung
around, and then, with the deflection rudders slanted downward, came on
with a rush.  When near the landing place, just at the side of the
house, the motor was stopped, and the gas, with a hissing noise, rushed
into the red aluminum container. This immediately made the ship more
buoyant and it landed almost as gently as a feather.

No sooner had the wheels which formed the lower part of the craft
touched the ground than there leaped from the cabin of the Red Cloud a
young man.

"Well, dad!" he exclaimed. "Here we are again, safe and sound. Made a
record, too. Touched ninety miles an hour at times--didn't we, Mr.
Sharp?"

"That's what," agreed a tall, thin, dark-complexioned man, who followed
Tom Swift more leisurely in his exit from the cabin. Mr. Sharp, a
veteran aeronaut, stopped to fasten guy ropes from the airship to
strong stakes driven into the ground.

"And we'd have done better, only we struck a hard wind against us about
two miles up in the air, which delayed us," went on Tom. "Did you hear
us coming, dad?"

"Yes, and it startled him," put in Mrs. Baggert. "I guess he wasn't
expecting you."

"Oh, well, I shouldn't have been so alarmed, only I was thinking deeply
about a certain change I am going to make in the submarine, Tom. I was
day-dreaming, I think, when your ship whizzed through the air. But tell
me, did you find everything all right at Shopton? No signs of any of
those scoundrels of the Happy Harry gang having been around?" and Mr.
Swift looked anxiously at his son.

"Not a sign, dad," replied Tom quickly. "Everything was all right. We
brought the things you wanted. They're in the airship. Oh, but it was a
fine trip. I'd like to take another right out to sea."

"Not now, Tom," said his father. "I want you to help me.  And I need
Mr. Sharp's help, too. Get the things out of the car, and we'll go to
the shop."

"First I think we'd better put the airship away," advised Mr. Sharp. "I
don't just like the looks of the weather, and, besides, if we leave the
ship exposed we'll be sure to have a crowd around sooner or later, and
we don't want that."

"No, indeed," remarked the aged inventor hastily. "I don't want people
prying around the submarine shed. By all means put the airship away,
and then come into the shop."

In spite of its great size the aeroplane was easily wheeled along by
Tom and Mr. Sharp, for the gas in the container made it so buoyant that
it barely touched the earth. A little more of the powerful vapor and
the Red Cloud would have risen by itself. In a few minutes the
wonderful craft, of which my readers have been told in detail in a
previous volume, was safely housed in a large tent, which was securely
fastened.

Mr. Sharp and Tom, carrying some bundles which they had taken from the
car, or cabin, of the craft, went toward a large shed, which adjoined
the house that Mr. Swift had hired for the season at the seashore. They
found the lad's father standing before a great shape, which loomed up
dimly in the semi-darkness of the building. It was like an immense
cylinder, pointed at either end, and here and there were openings,
covered with thick glass, like immense, bulging eyes. From the number
of tools and machinery all about the place, and from the appearance of
the great cylinder itself, it was easy to see that it was only partly
completed.

"Well, how goes it, dad?" asked the youth, as he deposited his bundle
on a bench. "Do you think you can make it work?"

"I think so, Tom. The positive and negative plates are giving me
considerable trouble, though. But I guess we can solve the problem. Did
you bring me the galvanometer?"

"Yes, and all the other things," and the young inventor proceeded to
take the articles from the bundles he carried.

Mr. Swift looked them over carefully, while Tom walked about examining
the submarine, for such was the queer craft that was contained in the
shed.  He noted that some progress had been made on it since he had
left the seacoast several days before to make a trip to Shopton, in New
York State, where the Swift home was located, after some tools and
apparatus that his father wanted to obtain from his workshop there.

"You and Mr. Jackson have put on several new plates," observed the lad
after a pause.

"Yes," admitted his father. "Garret and I weren't idle, were we,
Garret?" and he nodded to the aged engineer, who had been in his employ
for many years.

"No; and I guess we'll soon have her in the water, Tom, now that you
and Mr. Sharp are here to help us," replied Garret Jackson.

"We ought to have Mr. Damon here to bless the submarine and his liver
and collar buttons a few times," put in Mr. Sharp, who brought in
another bundle. He referred to an eccentric individual who had recently
made an airship voyage with himself and Tom, Mr. Damon's peculiarity
being to use continually such expressions as: "Bless my soul! Bless my
liver!"

"Well, I'll be glad when we can make a trial trip," went on Tom. "I've
traveled pretty fast on land with my motorcycle, and we certainly have
hummed through the air. Now I want to see how it feels to scoot along
under water."

"Well, if everything goes well we'll be in position to make a trial
trip inside of a month," remarked the aged inventor. "Look here, Mr.
Sharp, I made a change in the steering gear, which I'd like you and Tom
to consider."

The three walked around to the rear of the odd-looking structure, if an
object shaped like a cigar can be said to have a front and rear, and
the inventor, his son, and the aeronaut were soon deep in a discussion
of the technicalities connected with under-water navigation.

A little later they went into the house, in response to a summons from
the supper bell, vigorously rung by Mrs. Baggert. She was not fond of
waiting with meals, and even the most serious problem of mechanics was,
in her estimation, as nothing compared with having the soup get cold,
or the possibility of not having the meat done to a turn.

The meal was interspersed with remarks about the recent airship flight
of Tom and Mr. Sharp, and discussions about the new submarine. This
talk went on even after the table was cleared off and the three had
adjourned to the sitting-room. There Mr. Swift brought out pencil and
paper, and soon he and Mr. Sharp were engrossed in calculating the
pressure per square inch of sea water at a depth of three miles.

"Do you intend to go as deep as that?" asked Tom, looking up from a
paper he was reading.

"Possibly," replied his father; and his son resumed his perusal of the
sheet.

"Now," went on the inventor to the aeronaut, "I have another plan. In
addition to the positive and negative plates which will form our motive
power, I am going to install forward and aft propellers, to use in case
of accident."

"I say, dad! Did you see this?" suddenly exclaimed Tom, getting up from
his chair, and holding his finger on a certain place in the page of the
paper.

"Did I see what?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Why, this account of the sinking of the treasure ship."

"Treasure ship? No. Where?"

"Listen," went on Tom. "I'll read it: 'Further advices from Montevideo,
Uruguay, South America, state that all hope has been given up of
recovering the steamship Boldero, which foundered and went down off
that coast in the recent gale.  Not only has all hope been abandoned of
raising the vessel, but it is feared that no part of the three hundred
thousand dollars in gold bullion which she carried will ever be
recovered. Expert divers who were taken to the scene of the wreck state
that the depth of water, and the many currents existing there, due to a
submerged shoal, preclude any possibility of getting at the hull. The
bullion, it is believed, was to have been used to further the interests
of a certain revolutionary faction, but it seems likely that they will
have to look elsewhere for the sinews of war.  Besides the bullion the
ship also carried several cases of rifles, it is stated, and other
valuable cargo. The crew and what few passengers the Boldero carried
were, contrary to the first reports, all saved by taking to the boats.
It appears that some of the ship's plates were sprung by the stress in
which she labored in a storm, and she filled and sank gradually.'
There! what do you think of that, dad?" cried Tom as he finished.

"What do I think of it? Why, I think it's too bad for the
revolutionists, Tom, of course."

"No; I mean about the treasure being still on board the ship. What
about that?"

"Well, it's likely to stay there, if the divers can't get at it. Now,
Mr. Sharp, about the propellers--"

"Wait, dad!" cried Tom earnestly.

"Why, Tom, what's the matter?" asked Mr. Swift in some surprise.

"How soon before we can finish our submarine?" went on Tom, not
answering the question.

"About a month. Why?"

"Why? Dad, why can't we have a try for that treasure? It ought to be
comparatively easy to find that sunken ship off the coast of Uruguay.
In our submarine we can get close up to it, and in the new diving suits
you invented we can get at that gold bullion. Three hundred thousand
dollars! Think of it, dad! Three hundred thousand dollars! We could
easily claim all of it, since the owners have abandoned it, but we
would be satisfied with half. Let's hurry up, finish the submarine, and
have a try for it."

"But, Tom, you forget that I am to enter my new ship in the trials for
the prize offered by the United States Government."

"How much is the prize if you win it?" asked Tom.

"Fifty thousand dollars."

"Well, here's a chance to make three times that much at least, and
maybe more. Dad, let the Government prize go, and try for the treasure.
Will you?"

Tom looked eagerly at his father, his eyes shining with anticipation.
Mr. Swift was not a quick thinker, but the idea his son had proposed
made an impression on him. He reached out his hand for the paper in
which the young inventor had seen the account of the sunken treasure.
Slowly he read it through. Then he passed it to Mr. Sharp.

"What do you think of it?" he asked of the aeronaut.

"There's a possibility," remarked the balloonist "We might try for it.
We can easily go three miles down, and it doesn't lie as deeply as
that, if this account is true. Yes, we might try for it. But we'd have
to omit the Government contests."

"Will you, dad?" asked Tom again.

Mr. Swift considered a moment longer.

"Yes, Tom, I will," he finally decided. "Going after the treasure will
be likely to afford us a better test of the submarine than would any
Government tests. We'll try to locate the sunken Boldero."

"Hurrah!" cried the lad, taking the paper from Mr. Sharp and waving it
in the air. "That's the stuff!  Now for a search for the submarine
treasure!"




Chapter Two

Finishing the Submarine


"What's the matter?" cried Mrs. Baggert, the housekeeper, hurrying in
from the kitchen, where she was washing the dishes. "Have you seen some
of those scoundrels who robbed you, Mr. Swift? If you have, the police
down here ought to--"

"No, it's nothing like that," explained Mr. Swift. "Tom has merely
discovered in the paper an account of a sunken treasure ship, and he
wants us to go after it, down under the ocean."

"Oh, dear! Some more of Captain Kidd's hidden hoard, I suppose?"
ventured the housekeeper. "Don't you bother with it, Mr. Swift. I had a
cousin once, and he got set in the notion that he knew where that
pirate's treasure was. He spent all the money he had and all he could
borrow digging for it, and he never found a penny. Don't waste your
time on such foolishness. It's bad enough to be building airships and
submarines without going after treasure."  Mrs. Baggert spoke with the
freedom of an old friend rather than a hired housekeeper, but she had
been in the family ever since Tom's mother died, when he was a baby,
and she had many privileges.

"Oh, this isn't any of Kidd's treasure," Tom assured her.  "If we get
it, Mrs. Baggert, I'll buy you a diamond ring."

"Humph!" she exclaimed, as Tom began to hug her in boyish fashion. "I
guess I'll have to buy all the diamond rings I want, if I have to
depend on your treasure for them," and she went back to the kitchen.

"Well," went on Mr. Swift after a pause, "if we are going into the
treasure-hunting business, Tom, we'll have to get right to work. In the
first place, we must find out more about this ship, and just where it
was sunk."

"I can do that part," said Mr. Sharp. "I know some sea captains, and
they can put me on the track of locating the exact spot. In fact, it
might not be a bad idea to take an expert navigator with us. I can
manage in the air all right, but I confess that working out a location
under water is beyond me."

"Yes, an old sea captain wouldn't be a bad idea, by any means,"
conceded Mr. Swift. "Well, if you'll attend to that detail, Mr. Sharp,
Tom, Mr. Jackson and I will finish the submarine. Most of the work is
done, however, and it only remains to install the engine and motors.
Now, in regard to the negative and positive electric plates, I'd like
your opinion, Tom."

For Tom Swift was an inventor, second in ability only to his father,
and his advice was often sought by his parent on matters of electrical
construction, for the lad had made a specialty of that branch of
science.

While father and son were deep in a discussion of the apparatus of the
submarine, there will be an opportunity to make the reader a little
better acquainted with them. Those of you who have read the previous
volumes of this series do not need to be told who Tom Swift is. Others,
however, may be glad to have a proper introduction to him.

Tom Swift lived with his father, Barton Swift, in the village of
Shopton, New York. The Swift home was on the outskirts of the town, and
the large house was surrounded by a number of machine shops, in which
father and son, aided by Garret Jackson, the engineer, did their
experimental and constructive work. Their house was not far from Lake
Carlopa, a fairly large body of water, on which Tom often speeded his
motor-boat.

In the first volume of this series, entitled "Tom Swift and His
Motor-Cycle," it was told how he became acquainted with Mr. Wakefield
Damon, who suffered an accident while riding one of the speedy
machines. The accident disgusted Mr. Damon with motor-cycles, and Tom
secured it for a low price. He had many adventures on it, chief among
which was being knocked senseless and robbed of a valuable patent model
belonging to his father, which he was taking to Albany. The attack was
committed by a gang known as the Happy Harry gang, who were acting at
the instigation of a syndicate of rich men, who wanted to secure
control of a certain patent turbine engine which Mr. Swift had invented.

Tom set out in pursuit of the thieves, after recovering from their
attack, and had a strenuous time before he located them.

In the second volume, entitled "Tom Swift and His Motor-Boat," there
was related our hero's adventures in a fine craft which was recovered
from the thieves and sold at auction. There was a mystery connected
with the boat, and for a long time Tom could not solve it. He was
aided, however, by his chum, Ned Newton, who worked in the Shopton
Bank, and also by Mr. Damon and Eradicate Sampson, an aged colored
whitewasher, who formed quite an attachment for Tom.

In his motor-boat Tom had more than one race with Andy Foger, a rich
lad of Shopton, who was a sort of bully. He had red hair and squinty
eyes, and was as mean in character as he was in looks. He and his
cronies, Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey, made trouble for Tom, chiefly
because Tom managed to beat Andy twice in boat races.

It was while in his motor-boat, Arrow, that Tom formed the acquaintance
of John Sharp, a veteran balloonist. While coming down Lake Carlopa on
the way to the Swift home, which had been entered by thieves, Tom, his
father and Ned Newton, saw a balloon on fire over the lake. Hanging
from a trapeze on it was Mr. Sharp, who had made an ascension from a
fair ground. By hard work on the part of Tom and his friends the
aeronaut was saved, and took up his residence with the Swifts.

His advent was most auspicious, for Tom and his father were then
engaged in perfecting an airship, and Mr. Sharp was able to lend them
his skill, so that the craft was soon constructed.

In the third volume, called "Tom Swift and His Airship," there was set
down the doings of the young inventor, Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon on a
trip above the clouds. They undertook it merely for pleasure, but they
encountered considerable danger, before they completed it, for they
nearly fell into a blazing forest once, and were later fired at by a
crowd of excited people. This last act was to effect their capture, for
they were taken for a gang of bank robbers, and this was due directly
to Andy Foger.

The morning after Tom and his friends started on their trip in the air,
the Shopton Bank was found to have been looted of seventy-five thousand
dollars. Andy Foger at once told the police that Tom Swift had taken
the money, and when asked how he knew this, he said he had seen Tom
hanging around the bank the night before the vault was burst open, and
that the young inventor had some burglar tools in his possession.
Warrants were at once sworn out for Tom and Mr. Damon, who was also
accused of being one of the robbers, and a reward of five thousand
dollars was offered.

Tom, Mr. Damon and Mr. Sharp sailed on, all unaware of this, and unable
to account for being fired upon, until they accidentally read in the
paper an account of their supposed misdeeds. They lost no time in
starting back home, and on the way got on the track of the real bank
robbers, who were members of the Happy Harry gang.

How the robbers were captured in an exciting raid, how Tom recovered
most of the stolen money, and how he gave Andy Foger a deserved
thrashing for giving a false clue was told of, and there was an account
of a race in which the Red Cloud (as the airship was called) took part,
as well as details of how Tom and his friends secured the reward, which
Andy Foger hoped to collect.

Those of you who care to know how the Red Cloud was constructed, and
how she behaved in the air, even during accidents and when struck by
lightning, may learn by reading the third volume, for the airship was
one of the most successful ever constructed.

When the craft was finished, and the navigators were ready to start on
their first long trip, Mr. Swift was asked to go with them. He
declined, but would not tell why, until Tom, pressing him for an
answer, learned that his father was planning a submarine boat, which he
hoped to enter in some trials for Government prizes. Mr. Swift remained
at home to work on this submarine, while his son and Mr. Sharp were
sailing above the clouds.

On their return, however, and after the bank mystery had been cleared
up, Tom and Mr. Sharp, aided Mr. Swift in completing the submarine,
until, when the present story opens, it needed but little additional
work to make the craft ready for the water.

Of course it had to be built near the sea, as it would have been
impossible to transport it overland from Shopton.  So, before the keel
was laid, Mr. Swift rented a large cottage at a seaside place on the
New Jersey coast and there, after erecting a large shed, the work on
the Advance, as the under-water ship was called, was begun.

It was soon to be launched in a large creek that extended in from the
ocean and had plenty of water at high tide. Tom and Mr. Sharp made
several trips back and forth from Shopton in their airship, to see that
all was safe at home and occasionally to get needed tools and supplies
from the shops, for not all the apparatus could be moved from Shopton
to the coast.

It was when returning from one of these trips that Tom brought with him
the paper containing an account of the wreck of the Boldero and the
sinking of the treasure she carried.

Until late that night the three fortune-hunters discussed various
matters.

"We'll hurry work on the ship," said Mr. Swift at length.  "Tom, I
wonder if your friend, Mr. Damon, would care to try how it seems under
water? He stood the air trip fairly well."

"I'll write and ask him," answered the lad. "I'm sure he'll go."

Securing, a few days later, the assistance of two mechanics, whom he
knew he could trust, for as yet the construction of the Advance was a
secret, Mr. Swift prepared to rush work on the submarine, and for the
next three weeks there were busy times in the shed next to the seaside
cottage. So busy, in fact, were Tom and Mr. Sharp, that they only found
opportunity for one trip in the airship, and that was to get some
supplies from the shops at home.

"Well," remarked Mr. Swift one night, at the close of a hard day's
work, "another week will see our craft completed.  Then we will put it
in the water and see how it floats, and whether it submerges as I hope
it does. But come on, Tom. I want to lock up. I'm very tired to-night."

"All right, dad," answered the young inventor coming from the darkened
rear of the shop. "I just want to--"

He paused suddenly, and appeared to be listening. Then he moved softly
back to where he had come from.

"What's the matter?" asked his father in a whisper.  "What's up, Tom?"

The lad did not answer Mr. Swift, with a worried look on his face,
followed his son. Mr. Sharp stood in the door of the shop.

"I thought I heard some one moving around back here," went on Tom
quietly.

"Some one in this shop!" exclaimed the aged inventor excitedly. "Some
one trying to steal my ideas again! Mr. Sharp, come here! Bring that
rifle! We'll teach these scoundrels a lesson!"

Tom quickly darted back to the extreme rear of the building. There was
a scuffle, and the next minute Tom cried out:

"What are you doing here?"

"Ha! I beg your pardon," replied a voice. "I am looking for Mr. Barton
Swift."

"My father," remarked Tom. "But that's a queer place to look for him.
He's up front. Father, here's a man who wishes to see you," he called.

"Yes, I strolled in, and seeing no one about I went to the rear of the
place," the voice went on. "I hope I haven't transgressed."

"We were busy on the other side of the shop, I guess," replied Tom, and
he looked suspiciously at the man who emerged from the darkness into
the light from a window. "I beg your pardon for grabbing you the way I
did," went on the lad, "but I thought you were one of a gang of men
we've been having trouble with."

"Oh, that's all right," continued the man easily. "I know Mr. Swift,
and I think he will remember me. Ah, Mr. Swift, how do you do?" he
added quickly, catching sight of Tom's father, who, with Mr. Sharp, was
coming to meet the lad.

"Addison Berg!" exclaimed the aged inventor as he saw the man's face
more plainly. "What are you doing here?"

"I came to see you," replied the man. "May I have a talk with you
privately?"

"I--I suppose so," assented Mr. Swift nervously. "Come into the house."

Mr. Berg left Tom's side and advanced to where Mr. Swift was standing.
Together the two emerged from the now fast darkening shop and went
toward the house.

"Who is he?" asked Mr. Sharp of the young inventor in a whisper.

"I don't know," replied the lad; "but, whoever he is, dad seems afraid
of him. I'm going to keep my eyes open."




Chapter Three

Mr. Berg is Astonished


Following his father and the stranger whom the aged inventor had
addressed as Mr. Berg, Tom and Mr. Sharp entered the house, the lad
having first made sure that Garret Jackson was on guard in the shop
that contained the submarine.

"Now," said Mr. Swift to the newcomer, "I am at your service. What is
it you wish?"

"In the first place, let me apologize for having startled you and your
friends," began the man. "I had no idea of sneaking into your workshop,
but I had just arrived here, and seeing the doors open I went in. I
heard no one about, and I wandered to the back of the place. There I
happened to stumble over a board--"

"And I heard you," interrupted Tom.

"Is this one of your employees?" asked Mr. Berg in rather frigid tones.

"That is my son," replied Mr. Swift.

"Oh, I beg your pardon." The man's manner changed quickly.  "Well, I
guess you did hear me, young man. I didn't intend to bark my shins the
way I did, either. You must have taken me for a burglar or a sneak
thief."

"I have been very much bothered by a gang of unscrupulous men," said
Mr. Swift, "and I suppose Tom thought it was some of them sneaking
around again."

"That's what I did," added the lad. "I wasn't going to have any one
steal the secret of the submarine if I could help it."

"Quite right! Quite right!" exclaimed Mr. Berg. "But my purpose was an
open one. As you know, Mr. Swift, I represent the firm of Bentley &
Eagert, builders of submarine boats and torpedoes. They heard that you
were constructing a craft to take part in the competitive prize tests
of the United States Government, and they asked me to come and see you
to learn when your ship would be ready. Ours is completed, but we
recognize that it will be for the best interests of all concerned if
there are a number of contestants, and my firm did not want to send in
their entry until they knew that you were about finished with your
ship. How about it? Are you ready to compete?"

"Yes," said Mr. Swift slowly. "We are about ready. My craft needs a few
finishing touches, and then it will be ready to launch."

"Then we may expect a good contest on your part," suggested Mr. Berg.

"Well," began the aged inventor, "I don't know about that."

"What's that?" exclaimed Mr. Berg.

"I said I wasn't quite sure that we would compete," went on Mr. Swift.
"You see, when I first got this idea for a submarine boat I had it in
mind to try for the Government prize of fifty thousand dollars."

"That's what we want, too," interrupted Mr. Berg with a smile.

"But," went on Tom's father, "since then certain matters have come up,
and I think, on the whole, that we'll not compete for the prize after
all."

"Not compete for the prize?" almost shouted the agent for Bentley &
Eagert. "Why, the idea! You ought to compete. It is good for the trade.
We think we have a very fine craft, and probably we would beat you in
the tests, but--"

"I wouldn't be too sure of that," put in Tom. "You have only seen the
outside of our boat. The inside is better yet."

"Ah, I have no doubt of that," spoke Mr. Berg, "but we have been at the
business longer than you have, and have had more experience. Still we
welcome competition. But I am very much surprised that you are not
going to compete for the prize, Mr. Swift. Very much surprised, indeed!
You see, I came down from Philadelphia to arrange so that we could both
enter our ships at the same time. I understand there is another firm of
submarine boat builders who are going to try for the prize, and I want
to arrange a date that will be satisfactory to all. I am greatly
astonished that you are not going to compete."

"Well, we were going to," said Mr. Swift, "only we have changed our
minds, that's all. My son and I have other plans."

"May I ask what they are?" questioned Mr. Berg.

"You may," exclaimed Tom quickly; "but I don't believe we can tell you.
They're a secret," he added more cordially.

"Oh, I see," retorted Mr. Berg. "Well, of course I don't wish to
penetrate any of your secrets, but I hoped we could contest together
for the Government prize. It is worth trying for I assure you--fifty
thousand dollars. Besides, there is the possibility of selling a number
of submarines to the United States. It's a fine prize."

"But the one we are after is a bigger one," cried Tom impetuously, and
the moment he had spoken he wished he could recall the words.

"Eh? What's that?" exclaimed Mr. Berg. "You don't mean to say another
government has offered a larger prize? If I had known that I would not
have let my firm enter into the competition for the bonus offered by
the United States.  Please tell me."

"I'm sorry," went on Tom more soberly. "I shouldn't have spoken. Mr.
Berg, the plans of my father and myself are such that we can't reveal
them now. We are going to try for a prize, but not in competition with
you. It's an entirely different matter."

"Well, I guess you'll find that the firm of Bentley & Eagert are
capable of trying for any prizes that are offered," boasted the agent.
"We may be competitors yet."

"I don't believe so," replied Mr. Swift.

"We may," repeated Mr. Berg. "And if we do, please remember that we
will show no mercy. Our boats are the best."

"And may the best boat win," interjected Mr. Sharp.  "That's all we
ask. A fair field and no favors."

"Of course," spoke the agent coldly. "Is this another son of yours?" he
asked.

"No but a good friend," replied the aged inventor. "No, Mr. Berg, we
won't compete this time. You may tell your firm so."

"Very good," was the other's stiff reply. "Then I will bid you good
night. We shall carry off the Government prize, but permit me to add
that I am very much astonished, very much indeed, that you do not try
for the prize. From what I have seen of your submarine you have a very
good one, almost as good, in some respects, as ours.  I bid you good
night," and with a bow the man left the room and hurried away from the
house.




Chapter Four

Tom is Imprisoned


"Well, I must say he's a cool one," remarked Tom, as the echoes of Mr.
Berg's steps died away. "The idea of thinking his boat better than
ours! I don't like that man, dad. I'm suspicious of him. Do you think
he came here to steal some of our ideas?"

"No, I hardly believe so, my son. But how did you discover him?"

"Just as you saw, dad. I heard a noise and went back there to
investigate. I found him sneaking around, looking at the electric
propeller plates. I went to grab him just as he stumbled over a board.
At first I thought it was one of the old gang. I'm almost sure he was
trying to discover something."

"No, Tom. The firm he works for are good business men, and they would
not countenance anything like that. They are heartless competitors,
however, and if they saw a legitimate chance to get ahead of me and
take advantage, they would do it. But they would not sneak in to steal
my ideas. I feel sure of that. Besides, they have a certain type of
submarine which they think is the best ever invented, and they would
hardly change at this late day. They feel sure of winning the
Government prize, and I'm just as glad we're not going to have a
contest."

"Do you think our boat is better than theirs?"

"Much better, in many respects."

"I don't like that man Berg, though," went on Tom.

"Nor do I," added his father. "There is something strange about him.
He was very anxious that I should compete.  Probably he thought his
firm's boat would go so far ahead of ours that they would get an extra
bonus. But I'm glad he didn't see our new method of propulsion. That is
the principal improvement in the Advance over other types of
submarines. Well, another week and we will be ready for the test."

"Have you known Mr. Berg long, dad?"

"Not very. I met him in Washington when I was in the patent office. He
was taking out papers on a submarine for his firm at the same time I
got mine for the Advance. It is rather curious that he should come all
the way here from Philadelphia, merely to see if I was going to
compete. There is something strange about it, something that I can't
understand."

The time was to come when Mr. Swift and his son were to get at the
bottom of Mr. Berg's reasons, and they learned to their sorrow that he
had penetrated some of their secrets.

Before going to bed that night Tom and Mr. Sharp paid a visit to the
shed where the submarine was resting on the ways, ready for launching.
They found Mr. Jackson on guard and the engineer said that no one had
been around. Nor was anything found disturbed.

"It certainly is a great machine," remarked the lad as he looked up at
the cigar-shaped bulk towering over his head.  "Dad has outdone himself
this trip."

"It looks all right," commented Mr. Sharp. "Whether it will work is
another question."

"Yes, we can't tell until it's in the water," conceded Tom. "But I
hope it does. Dad has spent much time and money on it."

The Advance was, as her name indicated, much in advance of previous
submarines. There was not so much difference in outward construction as
there was in the means of propulsion and in the manner in which the
interior and the machinery were arranged.

The submarine planned by Mr. Swift and Tom jointly, and constructed by
them, with the aid of Mr. Sharp and Mr. Jackson, was shaped like a
Cigar, over one hundred feet long and twenty feet in diameter at the
thickest part. It was divided into many compartments, all water-tight,
so that if one or even three were flooded the ship would still be
useable.

Buoyancy was provided for by having several tanks for the introduction
of compressed air, and there was an emergency arrangement so that a
collapsible aluminum container could be distended and filled with a
powerful gas. This was to be used if, by any means, the ship was
disabled on the bottom of the ocean. The container could be expanded
and filled, and would send the Advance to the surface.

Another peculiar feature was that the engine-room, dynamos and other
apparatus were all contained amidships. This gave stability to the
craft, and also enabled the same engine to operate both shafts and
propellers, as well as both the negative forward electrical plates, and
the positive rear ones.

These plates were a new idea in submarine construction, and were the
outcome of an idea of Mr. Swift, with some suggestions from his son.

The aged inventor did not want to depend on the usual screw propellers
for his craft, nor did he want to use a jet of compressed air, shooting
out from a rear tube, nor yet a jet of water, by means of which the
creature called the squid shoots himself along. Mr. Swift planned to
send the Advance along under water by means of electricity.

Certain peculiar plates were built at the forward and aft blunt noses
of the submarine. Into the forward plate a negative charge of
electricity was sent, and into the one at the rear a positive charge,
just as one end of a horseshoe magnet is positive and will repel the
north end of a compass needle, while the other pole of a magnet is
negative and will attract it. In electricity like repels like, while
negative and positive have a mutual attraction for each other.

Mr. Swift figured out that if he could send a powerful current of
negative electricity into the forward plate it would pull the boat
along, for water is a good conductor of electricity, while if a
positive charge was sent into the rear plate it would serve to push the
submarine along, and he would thus get a pulling and pushing motion,
just as a forward and aft propeller works on some ferry boats.

But the inventor did not depend on these plates alone.  There were
auxiliary forward and aft propellers of the regular type, so that if
the electrical plates did not work, or got out of order, the screws
would serve to send the Advance along.

There was much machinery in the submarine. There were gasolene motors,
since space was too cramped to allow the carrying of coal for boilers.
There were dynamos, motors and powerful pumps. Some of these were for
air, and some for water. To sink the submarine below the surface large
tanks were filled with water. To insure a more sudden descent,
deflecting rudders were also used, similar to those on an airship.
There were also special air pumps, and one for the powerful gas, which
was manufactured on board.

Forward from the engine-room was a cabin, where meals could be served,
and where the travelers could remain in the daytime. There was also a
small cooking galley, or kitchen, there. Back of the engine-room were
the sleeping quarters and the storerooms. The submarine was steered
from the forward compartment, and here were also levers, wheels and
valves that controlled all the machinery, while a number of dials
showed in which direction they were going, how deep they were, and at
what speed they were moving, as well as what the ocean pressure was.

On top, forward, was a small conning, or observation tower, with
auxiliary and steering and controlling apparatus there. This was to be
used when the ship was moving along on the surface of the ocean, or
merely with the deck awash.  There was a small flat deck surrounding
the conning tower and this was available when the craft was on the
surface.

There was provision made for leaving the ship when it was on the bed of
the ocean. When it was desired to do this the occupants put on diving
suits, which were provided with portable oxygen tanks. Then they
entered a chamber into which water was admitted until it was equal in
pressure to that outside. Then a steel door was opened, and they could
step out. To re-enter the ship the operation was reversed.  This was
not a new feature. In fact, many submarines to-day use it.

At certain places there were thick bull's-eye windows, by means of
which the under-water travelers could look out into the ocean through
which they were moving. As a defense against the attacks of submarine
monsters there was a steel, pointed ram, like a big harpoon. There were
also a bow and a stern electrical gun, of which more will be told later.

In addition to ample sleeping accommodations, there were many
conveniences aboard the Advance. Plenty of fresh water could be
carried, and there was an apparatus for distilling more from the sea
water that surrounded the travelers.  Compressed air was carried in
large tanks, and oxygen could be made as needed. In short, nothing that
could add to the comfort or safety of the travelers had been omitted.
There was a powerful crane and windlass, which had been installed when
Mr. Swift thought his boat might be bought by the Government. This was
to be used for raising wrecks or recovering objects from the bottom of
the ocean. Ample stores and provisions were to be carried and, once the
travelers were shut up in the Advance, they could exist for a month
below the surface, providing no accident occurred.

All these things Tom and Mr. Sharp thought of as they looked over the
ship before turning in for the night. The craft was made immensely
strong to withstand powerful pressure at the bottom of the ocean. The
submarine could penetrate to a depth of about three miles. Below that
it was dangerous to go, as the awful force would crush the plates,
powerful as they were.

"Well, we'll rush things to-morrow and the next day," observed Tom as
he prepared to leave the building. "Then we'll soon see if it works."

For the next week there were busy times in the shop near the ocean.
Great secrecy was maintained, and though curiosity seekers did stroll
along now and then, they received little satisfaction. At first Mr.
Swift thought that the visit of Mr. Berg would have unpleasant results,
for he feared that the agent would talk about the craft, of which he
had so unexpectedly gotten a sight. But nothing seemed to follow from
his chance inspection, and it was forgotten.

It was one evening, about a week later, that Tom was alone in the shop.
The two mechanics that had been hired to help out in the rush had been
let go, and the ship needed but a few adjustments to make it ready for
the sea.

"I think I'll just take another look at the water tank valves," said
Tom to himself as he prepared to enter the big compartments which
received the water ballast. "I want to be sure they work properly and
quickly. We've got to depend on them to make us sink when we want to,
and, what's more important, to rise to the surface in a hurry. I've got
time enough to look them over before dad and Mr. Sharp get back."

Tom entered the starboard tank by means of an emergency sliding door
between the big compartments and the main part of the ship. This was
closed by a worm and screw gear, and once the ship was in the water
would seldom be used.

The young inventor proceeded with his task, carefully inspecting the
valves by the light of a lantern he carried.  The apparatus seemed to
be all right, and Tom was about to leave when a peculiar noise
attracted his attention. It was the sound of metal scraping on metal,
and the lad's quick and well-trained ear told him it was somewhere
about the ship.

He turned to leave the tank, but as he wheeled around his light flashed
on a solid wall of steel back of him. The emergency outlet had been
closed! He was a prisoner in the water compartment, and he knew, from
past experience, that shout as he would, his voice could not be heard
ten feet away. His father and Mr. Sharp, as he was aware, had gone to a
nearby city for some tools, and Mr. Jackson, the engineer, was
temporarily away. Mrs. Baggert, in the house, could not hear his cries.

"I'm locked in!" cried Tom aloud. "The worm gear must have shut of
itself. But I don't see how that could be. I've got to get out mighty
soon, though, or I'll smother. This tank is airtight, and it won't take
me long to breath up all the oxygen there is here. I must get that
slide open."

He sought to grasp the steel plate that closed the emergency opening.
His fingers slipped over the smooth, polished surface. He was
hermetically sealed up--a captive!  Blankly he set his lantern down and
leaned hopelessly against the wall of the tank.

"I've got to get out," he murmured.

As if in answer to him he heard a voice on the outside, crying:

"There, Tom Swift! I guess I've gotten even with you now!  Maybe next
time you won't take a reward away from me, and lick me into the
bargain. I've got you shut up good and tight, and you'll stay there
until I get ready to let you out."

"Andy Foger!" gasped Tom. "Andy Foger sneaked in here and turned the
gear. But how did he get to this part of the coast? Andy Foger, you let
me out!" shouted the young inventor; and as Andy's mocking laugh came
to him faintly through the steel sides of the submarine, the imprisoned
lad beat desperately with his hands on the smooth sides of the tank,
vainly wondering how his enemy had discovered him.




Chapter Five

Mr. Berg is Suspicious


Not for long did the young inventor endeavor to break his way out of
the water-ballast tank by striking the heavy sides of it. Tom realized
that this was worse than useless.  He listened intently, but could hear
nothing. Even the retreating footsteps of Andy Foger were inaudible.

"This certainly is a pickle!" exclaimed Tom aloud. "I can't understand
how he ever got here. He must have traced us after we went to Shopton
in the airship the last time.  Then he sneaked in here. Probably he saw
me enter, but how could he know enough to work the worm gear and close
the door? Andy has had some experience with machinery, though, and one
of the vaults in the bank where his father is a director closed just
like this tank. That's very likely how he learned about it. But I've
got to do something else besides thinking of that sneak, Andy. I've got
to get out of here. Let's see if I can work the gear from inside."

Before he started, almost, Tom knew that it would be impossible. The
tank was made to close from the interior of the submarine, and the
heavy door, built to withstand the pressure of tons of water, could not
be forced except by the proper means.

"No use trying that," concluded the lad, after a tiring attempt to
force back the sliding door with his hands. "I've got to call for help."

He shouted until the vibrations in the confined space made his ears
ring, and the mere exertion of raising his voice to the highest pitch
made his heart beat quickly. Yet there came no response. He hardly
expected that there would be any, for with his father and Mr. Sharp
away, the engineer absent on an errand, and Mrs. Baggert in the house
some distance off, there was no one to hear his calls for help, even if
they had been capable of penetrating farther than the extent of the
shed, where the under-water craft had been constructed.

"I've got to wait until some of them come out here," thought Tom.
"They'll be sure to release me and make a search. Then it will be easy
enough to call to them and tell them where I am, once they are inside
the shed. But--" He paused, for a horrible fear came over him. "Suppose
they should come--too late?" The tank was airtight. There was enough
air in it to last for some time, but, sooner or later, it would no
longer support life. Already, Tom thought, it seemed oppressive, though
probably that was his imagination.

"I must get out!" he repeated frantically. "I'll die in here soon."

Again he tried to shove back the steel door. Then he repeated his cries
until he was weary. No one answered him.  He fancied once he could hear
footsteps in the shed, and thought, perhaps, it was Andy, come back to
gloat over him.  Then Tom knew the red-haired coward would not dare
venture back. We must do Andy the justice to say that he never realized
that he was endangering Tom's life. The bully had no idea the tank was
airtight when he closed it. He had seen Tom enter and a sudden whim
came to him to revenge himself.

But that did not help the young inventor any. There was no doubt about
it now--the air was becoming close. Tom had been imprisoned nearly two
hours, and as he was a healthy, strong lad, he required plenty of
oxygen. There was certainly less than there had been in the tank. His
head began to buzz, and there was a ringing in his ears.

Once more he fell upon his knees, and his fingers sought the small
projections of the gear on the inside of the door. He could no more
budge the mechanism than a child could open a burglar-proof vault.

"It's no use," he moaned, and he sprawled at full length on the floor
of the tank, for there the air was purer. As he did so his fingers
touched something. He started as they closed around the handle of a big
monkey wrench. It was one he had brought into the place with him.
Imbued with new hope he struck a match and lighted his lantern, which
he had allowed to go out as it burned up too much of the oxygen. By the
gleam of it he looked to see if there were any bolts or nuts he could
loosen with the wrench, in order to slide the door back. It needed but
a glance to show him the futility of this.

"It's no go," he murmured, and he let the wrench fall to the floor.
There was a ringing, clanging sound, and as it smote his ears Tom
sprang up with an exclamation.

"That's the thing!" he cried. "I wonder I didn't think of it before. I
can signal for help by pounding on the sides of the tank with the
wrench. The blows will carry a good deal farther than my voice would."
Every one knows how far the noise of a boiler shop, with hammers
falling on steel plates, can be heard; much farther than can a human
voice.

Tom began a lusty tattoo on the metal sides of the tank.  At first he
merely rattled out blow after blow, and then, as another thought came
to him, he adopted a certain plan. Some time previous, when he and Mr.
Sharp had planned their trip in the air, the two had adopted a code of
signals. As it was difficult in a high wind to shout from one end of
the airship to the other, the young inventor would sometimes pound on
the pipe which ran from the pilot house of the Red Cloud to the
engine-room. By a combination of numbers, simple messages could be
conveyed. The code included a call for help. Forty-seven was the
number, but there had never been any occasion to use it.

Tom remembered this now. At once he ceased his indiscriminate
hammering, and began to beat out regularly--one, two, three, four--then
a pause, and seven blows would be given. Over and over again he rang
out this number--forty seven--the call for help.

"If Mr. Sharp only comes back he will hear that, even in the house,"
thought poor Tom "Maybe Garret or Mrs. Baggert will hear it, too, but
they won't know what it means.  They'll think I'm just working on the
submarine."

It seemed several hours to Tom that he pounded out that cry for aid,
but, as he afterward learned, it was only a little over an hour. Signal
after signal he sent vibrating from the steel sides of the tank. When
one arm tired he would use the other. He grew weary, his head was
aching, and there was a ringing in his ears; a ringing that seemed as
if ten thousand bells were jangling out their peals, and he could
barely distinguish his own pounding.

Signal after signal he sounded. It was becoming like a dream to him,
when suddenly, as he paused for a rest, he heard his name called
faintly, as if far away.

"Tom! Tom! Where are you?"

It was the voice of Mr. Sharp. Then followed the tones of the aged
inventor.

"My poor boy! Tom, are you still alive?"

"Yes, dad! In the starboard tank!" the lad gasped out, and then he lost
his senses. When he revived he was lying on a pile of bagging in the
submarine shop, and his father and the aeronaut were bending over him.

"Are you all right, Tom?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Yes--I--I guess so," was the hesitating answer. "Yes," the lad added,
as the fresh air cleared his head. "I'll be all right pretty soon. Have
you seen Andy Foger?"

"Did he shut you in there?" demanded Mr. Swift.

Tom nodded.

"I'll have him arrested!" declared Mr. Swift. "I'll go to town as soon
as you're in good shape again and notify the police."

"No, don't," pleaded Tom. "I'll take care of Andy myself.  I don't
really believe he knew how serious it was. I'll settle with him later,
though."

"Well, it came mighty near being serious," remarked Mr. Sharp grimly.
"Your father and I came back a little sooner than we expected, and as
soon as I got near the house I heard your signal. I knew what it was in
a moment. There were Mrs. Baggert and Garret talking away, and when I
asked them why they didn't answer your call they said they thought you
were merely tinkering with the machinery. But I knew better. It's the
first time we ever had a use for 'forty-seven,' Tom."

"And I hope it will be the last," replied the young inventor with a
faint smile. "But I'd like to know what Andy Foger is doing in this
neighborhood."

Tom was soon himself again and able to go to the house, where he found
Mrs. Baggert brewing a big basin of catnip tea, under the impression
that it would in some way be good for him. She could not forgive
herself for not having answered his signal, and as for Mr. Jackson, he
had started for a doctor as soon as he learned that Tom was shut up in
the tank. The services of the medical man were canceled by telephone,
as there was no need for him, and the engineer came back to the house.

Tom was fully himself the next day, and aided his father and Mr. Sharp
in putting the finishing touches to the Advance. It was found that some
alteration was required in the auxiliary propellers, and this, much to
the regret of the young inventor, would necessitate postponing the
trial a few days.

"But we'll have her in the water next Friday," promised Mr. Swift.

"Aren't you superstitious about Friday?" asked the balloonist.

"Not a bit of it," replied the aged inventor. "Tom," he added, "I wish
you would go in the house and get me the roll of blueprints you'll find
on my desk."

As the lad neared the cottage he saw, standing in front of the place, a
small automobile. A man had just descended from it, and it needed but a
glance to show that he was Mr. Addison Berg.

"Ah, good morning, Mr. Swift," greeted Mr. Berg. "I wish to see your
father, but as I don't wish to lay myself open to suspicions by
entering the shop, perhaps you will ask him to step here."

"Certainly," answered the lad, wondering why the agent had returned.
Getting the blueprints, and asking Mr. Berg to sit down on the porch,
Tom delivered the message.

"You come back with me, Tom," said his father. "I want you to be a
witness to what he says. I'm not going to get into trouble with these
people."

Mr. Berg came to the point at once.

"Mr. Swift," he said, "I wish you would reconsider your determination
not to enter the Government trials. I'd like to see you compete. So
would my firm."

"There is no use going over that again," replied the aged inventor. "I
have another object in view now than trying for the Government prize.
What it is I can't say, but it may develop in time--if we are
successful," and he looked at his son, smiling the while.

Mr. Berg tried to argue, but it was of no avail. Then he changed his
manner, and said:

"Well, since you won't, you won't, I suppose. I'll go back and report
to my firm.  Have you anything special to do this morning?" he went on
to Tom.

"Well, I can always find something to keep me busy," replied the lad,
"but as for anything special--"

"I thought perhaps you'd like to go for a trip in my auto," interrupted
Mr. Berg. "I had asked a young man who is stopping at the same hotel
where I am to accompany me, but he has unexpectedly left, and I don't
like to go alone. His name was--let me see. I have a wretched memory
for names, but it was something like Roger or Moger."

"Foger!" cried Tom. "Was it Andy Foger?"

"Yes, that was it. Why, do you know him?" asked Mr. Berg in some
surprise.

"I should say so," replied Tom. "He was the cause of what might have
resulted in something serious for me," and the lad explained about
being imprisoned in the tank.

"You don't tell me!" cried Mr. Berg. "I had no idea he was that kind of
a lad. You see, his father is one of the directors of the firm by whom
I am employed. Andy came from home to spend a few weeks at the seaside,
and stopped at the same hotel that I did. He went off yesterday
afternoon, and I haven't seen him since, though he promised to go for a
ride with me. He must have come over here and entered your shop
unobserved. I remember now he asked me where the submarine was being
built that was going to compete with our firm's, and I told him. I
didn't think he was that kind of a lad. Well, since he's probably gone
back home, perhaps you will come for a ride with me, Tom."

"I'm afraid I can't go, thank you," answered the lad. "We are very busy
getting our submarine in shape for a trial.  But I can imagine why Andy
left so hurriedly. He probably learned that a doctor had been summoned
for me, though, as it happened, I didn't need one. But Andy probably
got frightened at what he had done, and left. I'll make him more sorry,
when I meet him."

"Don't blame you a bit," commented Mr. Berg. "Well, I must be getting
back."

He hastened out to his auto, while Tom and his father watched the agent.

"Tom, never trust that man," advised the aged inventor solemnly.

"Just what I was about to remark," said his son. "Well, let's get back
to work. Queer that he should come here again, and it's queer about
Andy Foger."

Father and son returned to the machine shop, while Mr. Berg puffed away
in his auto. A little later, Tom having occasion to go to a building
near the boundary line of the cottage property which his father had
hired for the season, saw, through the hedge that bordered it, an
automobile standing in the road. A second glance showed him that it was
Mr. Berg's machine. Something had gone wrong with it, and the agent had
alighted to make an adjustment.

The young inventor was close to the man, though the latter was unaware
of his presence.

"Hang it all!" Tom heard Mr. Berg exclaim to himself. "I wonder what
they can be up to? They won't enter the Government contests, and they
won't say why. I believe they're up to some game, and I've got to find
out what it is. I wonder if I couldn't use this Foger chap?"

"He seems to have it in for this Tom Swift," Mr. Berg went on, still
talking to himself, though not so low but that Tom could hear him. "I
think I'll try it. I'll get Andy Foger to sneak around and find out
what the game is. He'll do it, I know."

By this time the auto was in working order again, and the agent took
his seat and started off.

"So that's how matters lie, eh?" thought Tom. "Well, Mr. Berg, we'll be
doubly on the lookout for you after this. As for Andy Foger, I think
I'll make him wish he'd never locked me in that tank. So you expect to
find out our 'game,' eh, Mr. Berg? Well, when you do know it, I think
it will astonish you. I only hope you don't learn what it is until we
get at that sunken treasure, though."

But alas for Tom's hopes. Mr. Berg did learn of the object of the
treasure-seekers, and sought to defeat them, as we shall learn as our
story proceeds.




Chapter Six

Turning the Tables


When the young inventor informed his father what he had overheard Mr.
Berg saying, the aged inventor was not as much worried as his son
anticipated.

"All we'll have to do, Tom," he said, "is to keep quiet about where we
are going. Once we have the Advance afloat, and try her out, we can
start on our voyage for the South American Coast and search for the
sunken treasure. When we begin our voyage under water I defy any one to
tell where we are going, or what our plans are. No, I don't believe we
need worry about Mr. Berg, though he probably means mischief."

"Well, I'm going to keep my eyes open for him and Andy Foger," declared
Tom.

The days that followed were filled with work. Not only were there many
unexpected things to do about the submarine, but Mr. Sharp was kept
busy making inquiries about the sunken treasure ship. These inquiries
had to be made carefully, as the adventurers did not want their plans
talked of, and nothing circulates more quickly than rumors of an
expedition after treasure of any kind.

"What about the old sea captain you were going to get to go with us?"
asked Mr. Swift of the balloonist one afternoon.  "Have you succeeded
in finding one yet?"

"Yes; I am in communication with a man I think will be just the person
for us. His name is Captain Alden Weston, and he has sailed all over
the world. He has also taken part in more than one revolution, and, in
fact, is a soldier of fortune. I do not know him personally, but a
friend of mine knows him, and says he will serve us faithfully. I have
written to him, and he will be here in a few days."

"That's good. Now about the location of the wreck itself.  Have you
been able to learn any more details?"

"Well, not many. You see, the Boldero was abandoned in a storm, and the
captain did not take very careful observations. As nearly as it can be
figured out the treasure ship went to the bottom in latitude forty-five
degrees south, and longitude twenty-seven east from Washington. That's
a pretty indefinite location, but I hope, once we get off the Uruguay
coast, we can better it. We can anchor or lay outside the harbor, and
in the small boat we carry go ashore and possibly gain more details.
For it was at Montevideo that the shipwrecked passengers and sailors
landed."

"Does Captain Weston know our object?" inquired Tom.

"No, and I don't propose to tell him until we are ready to start,"
replied Mr. Sharp. "I don't know just how he'll consider a submarine
trip after treasure, but if I spring it on him suddenly he's less
likely to back out. Oh, I think he'll go."

Somewhat unexpectedly the next day it was discovered that certain tools
and appliances were needed for the submarine, and they had been left in
the house at Shopton, where Eradicate Sampson was in charge as
caretaker during the absence of Mr. Swift and his son and the
housekeeper.

"Well, I suppose we'll have to go back after them," remarked Tom.
"We'll take the airship, dad, and make a two-days' trip of it. Is there
anything else you want?"

"Well, you might bring a bundle of papers you'll find in the lower
right hand drawer of my desk. They contain some memoranda I need."

Tom and Mr. Sharp had become so used to traveling in the airship that
it seemed no novelty to them, though they attracted much attention
wherever they went. They soon had the Red Cloud in readiness for a
flight, and rising in the air above the shop that contained the
powerful submarine, a craft utterly different in type from the
aeroplane, the nose of the airship was pointed toward Shopton.

They made a good flight and landed near the big shed where the bird of
the air was kept. It was early evening when they got to the Swift
homestead, and Eradicate Sampson was glad to see them.

Eradicate was a good cook, and soon had a meal ready for the travelers.
Then, while Mr. Sharp selected the tools and other things needed, and
put them in the airship ready for the start back the next morning, Tom
concluded he would take a stroll into Shopton, to see if he could see
his friend, Ned Newton. It was early evening, and the close of a
beautiful day, a sharp shower in the morning having cooled the air.

Tom was greeted by a number of acquaintances as he strolled along, for,
since the episode of the bank robbery, when he had so unexpectedly
returned with the thieves and the cash, the lad was better known than
ever.

"I guess Ned must be home," thought our hero as he looked in vain for
his chum among the throng on the streets. "I've got time to take a
stroll down to his house."

Tom was about to cross the street when he was startled by the sound of
an automobile horn loudly blown just at his side. Then a voice called:

"Hey, there! Git out of the way if you don't want to be run over!"

He looked up, and saw a car careening along. At the wheel was the
red-haired bully, Andy Foger, and in the tonneau were Sam Snedecker and
Pete Bailey.

"Git out of the way," added Sam, and he grinned maliciously at Tom.

The latter stepped back, well out of the path of the car, which was not
moving very fast. Just in front of Tom was a puddle of muddy water.
There was no necessity for Andy steering into it, but he saw his
opportunity, and a moment later one of the big pneumatic tires had
plunged into the dirty fluid, spattering it all over Tom, some even
going as high as his face.

"Ha! ha!" laughed Andy. "Maybe you'll get out of my way next time, Tom
Swift."

The young inventor was almost speechless from righteous anger. He wiped
the mud from his face, glanced down at his clothes, which were all but
ruined, and called out:

"Hold on there, Andy Foger! I want to see you!" for he thought of the
time when Andy had shut him in the tank.

"Ta! ta!" shouted Pete Bailey.

"See you later," added Sam.

"Better go home and take a bath, and then sail away in your submarine,"
went on Andy. "I'll bet it will sink."

Before Tom could reply the auto had turned a corner.  Disgusted and
angry, he tried to sop up some of the muddy water with his
handkerchief. While thus engaged he heard his name called, and looked
up to see Ned Newton.

"What's the matter? Fall down?" asked his chum.

"Andy Foger," replied Tom.

"That's enough," retorted Ned. "I can guess the rest.  We'll have to
tar and feather him some day, and ride him out of town on a rail. I'd
kick him myself, only his father is a director in the bank where I
work, and I'd be fired if I did. Can't afford any such pleasure. But
some day I'll give Andy a good trouncing, and then resign before they
can discharge me. But I'll be looking for another job before I do that.
Come on to my house, Tom, and I'll help you clean up."

Tom was a little more presentable when he left his chum's residence,
after spending the evening there, but he was still burning for revenge
against Andy and his cronies. He had half a notion to go to Andy's
house and tell Mr. Foger how nearly serious the bully's prank at the
submarine had been, but he concluded that Mr. Foger could only uphold
his son. "No, I'll settle with him myself," decided Tom.

Bidding Eradicate keep a watchful eye about the house, and leaving word
for Mr. Damon to be sure to come to the coast if he again called at the
Shopton house, Tom and Mr. Sharp prepared to make their return trip
early the next morning.

The gas tank was filled and the Red Cloud arose in the air. Then, with
the propellers moving at moderate speed, the nose of the craft was
pointed toward the New Jersey coast.

A few miles out from Shopton, finding there was a contrary wind in the
upper regions where they were traveling, Mr. Sharp descended several
hundred feet. They were moving over a sparsely settled part of the
country, and looking down, Tom saw, speeding along a highway, an
automobile.

"I wonder who's in it?" he remarked, taking down a telescope and
peering over the window ledge of the cabin.  The next moment he uttered
a startled exclamation.

"Andy  Foger, Sam  Snedecker and Pete Bailey!" he cried.  "Oh, I wish I
had a bucket of water to empty on them."

"I know a better way to get even with them than that," said Mr. Sharp.

"How?" asked Tom eagerly.

"I'll show you," replied the balloonist. "It's a trick I once played on
a fellow who did me an injury. Here, you steer for a minute until I get
the thing fixed, then I'll take charge."

Mr. Sharp went to the storeroom and came back with a long, stout rope
and a small anchor of four prongs. It was carried to be used in
emergencies, but so far had never been called into requisition.
Fastening the grapple to the cable, the balloonist said:

"Now, Tom, they haven't seen you. You stand in the stern and pay out
the rope. I'll steer the airship, and what I want you to do is to catch
the anchor in the rear of their car. Then I'll show you some fun."

Tom followed instructions. Slowly he lowered the rope with the dangling
grapple. The airship was also sent down, as the cable was not quite
long enough to reach the earth from the height at which they were. The
engine was run at slow speed, so that the noise would not attract the
attention of the three cronies who were speeding along, all unconscious
of the craft in the air over their heads. The Red Cloud was moving in
the same direction as was the automobile.

The anchor was now close to the rear of Andy's car.  Suddenly it caught
on the tonneau and Tom called that fact to Mr. Sharp.

"Fasten the rope at the cleat," directed the balloonist.

Tom did so, and a moment later the aeronaut sent the airship up by
turning more gas into the container. At the same time he reversed the
engine and the Red Cloud began pulling the touring car backward, also
lifting the rear wheels clear from the earth.

A startled cry from the occupants of the machine told Tom and his
friend that Andy and his cronies were aware something was wrong. A
moment later Andy, looking up, saw the airship hovering in the air
above him. Then he saw the rope fast to his auto. The airship was not
rising now, or the auto would have been turned over, but it was slowly
pulling it backward, in spite of the fact that the motor of the car was
still going.

"Here! You let go of me!" cried Andy. "I'll have you arrested if you
damage my car."

"Come up here and cut the rope," called Tom leaning over and looking
down. He could enjoy the bully's discomfiture.  As for Sam and Pete,
they were much frightened, and cowered down on the floor of the tonneau.

"Maybe you'll shut me in the tank again and splash mud on me!" shouted
Tom.

The rear wheels of the auto were lifted still higher from the ground,
as Mr. Sharp turned on a little more gas. Andy was not proof against
this.

"Oh! oh!" he cried. "Please let me down, Tom. I'm awful sorry for what
I did! I'll never do it again! Please, please let me down! Don't! You'll
tip me over!"

He had shut off his motor now, and was frantically clinging to the
steering wheel.

"Do you admit that you're a sneak and a coward?" asked Tom, "rubbing it
in."

"Yes, yes!  Oh, please let me down!"

"Shall we?" asked Tom of Mr. Sharp.

"Yes," replied the balloonist. "We can afford to lose the rope and
anchor for the sake of turning the tables. Cut the cable."

Tom saw what was intended. Using a little hatchet, he severed the rope
with a single blow. With a crash that could be heard up in the air
where the Red Cloud hovered, the rear wheels of the auto dropped to the
ground. Then came two loud reports.

"Both tires busted!" commented Mr. Sharp dryly, and Tom, looking down,
saw the trio of lads ruefully contemplating the collapsed rubber of the
rear wheels. The tables had been effectually turned on Andy Foger. His
auto was disabled, and the airship, with a graceful sweep, mounted
higher and higher, continuing on its way to the coast.




Chapter Seven

Mr. Damon Will Go


"Well, I guess they've had their lesson," remarked Tom, as he took an
observation through the telescope and saw Andy and his cronies hard at
work trying to repair the ruptured tires. "That certainly was a corking
good trick."

"Yes," admitted Mr. Sharp modestly. "I once did something similar, only
it was a horse and wagon instead of an auto.  But let's try for another
speed record. The conditions are just right."

They arrived at the coast much sooner than they had dared to hope, the
Red Cloud proving herself a veritable wonder.

The remainder of that day, and part of the next, was spent in working
on the submarine.

"We'll launch her day after to-morrow," declared Mr. Swift
enthusiastically. "Then to see whether my calculations are right or
wrong."

"It won't be your fault if it doesn't work," said his son.  "You
certainly have done your best."

"And so have you and Mr. Sharp and the others, for that matter. Well, I
have no doubt but that everything will be all right, Tom."

"There!" exclaimed Mr. Sharp the next morning, as he was adjusting a
certain gage. "I knew I'd forget something. That special brand of
lubricating oil. I meant to bring it from Shopton, and I didn't."

"Maybe I can get it in Atlantis," suggested Tom, naming the coast city
nearest to them. "I'll take a walk over. It isn't far."

"Will you? I'll be glad to have you," resumed the balloonist. "A gallon
will be all we'll need."

Tom was soon on his way. He had to walk, as the roads were too poor to
permit him to use the motor-cycle, and the airship attracted too much
attention to use on a short trip.  He was strolling along, when from
the other side of a row of sand dunes, that lined the uncertain road to
Atlantis, he heard some one speaking. At first the tones were not
distinct, but as the lad drew nearer to the voice he heard an
exclamation.

"Bless my gold-headed cane! I believe I'm lost. He said it was out this
way somewhere, but I don't see anything of it.  If I had that Eradicate
Sampson here now I'd--bless my shoelaces I don't know what I would do
to him."

"Mr. Damon! Mr. Damon!" cried Tom. "Is that you?"

"Me? Of course it's me! Who else would it be?" answered the voice. "But
who are you. Why, bless my liver! If it isn't Tom Swift!" he cried.
"Oh, but I'm glad to see you! I was afraid I was shipwrecked! Bless my
gaiters, how are you, anyhow? How is your father? How is Mr. Sharp, and
all the rest of them?"

"Pretty well. And you?"

"Me? Oh, I'm all right; only a trifle nervous. I called at your house
in Shopton yesterday, and Eradicate told me, as well as he could, where
you were located. I had nothing to do, so I thought I'd take a run down
here. But what's this I hear about you? Are you going on a voyage?"

"Yes."

"In the air? May I go along again? I certainly enjoyed my other trip in
the Red Cloud. That is, all but the fire and being shot at. May I go?"

"We're going on a different sort of trip this time," said the youth.

"Where?"

"Under water."

"Under water?  Bless my sponge bath! You don't mean it!"

"Yes. Dad has completed the submarine he was working on when we were
off in the airship, and it will be launched the day after to-morrow."

"Oh, that's so. I'd forgotten about it. He's going to try for the
Government prize, isn't he? But tell me more about it. Bless my
scarf-pin, but I'm glad I met you! Going into town, I take it. Well, I
just came from there, but I'll walk back with you. Do you think--is
there any possibility--that I could go with you? Of course, I don't
want to crowd you, but--"

"Oh, there'll be plenty of room," replied the young inventor. "In fact,
more room than we had in the airship. We were talking only the other
day about the possibility of you going with us, but we didn't think
you'd risk it."

"Risk it? Bless my liver! Of course I'll risk it! It can't be as bad
as sailing in the air. You can't fall, that's certain."

"No; but maybe you can't rise," remarked Tom grimly.

"Oh, we won't think of that. Of course, I'd like to go. I fully
expected to be killed in the Red Cloud, but as I wasn't. I'm ready to
take a chance in the water. On the whole, I think I prefer to be buried
at sea, anyhow. Now, then, will you take me?"

"I think I can safely promise," answered Tom with a smile at his
friend's enthusiasm.

The two were approaching the city, having walked along as they talked.
There were still some sand dunes near the road, and they kept on the
side of these, nearest the beach, where they could watch the breakers.

"But you haven't told me where you are going," went on Mr. Damon, after
blessing a few dozen objects. "Where do the Government trials take
place?"

"Well," replied the lad, "to be frank with you, we have abandoned our
intention of trying for the Government prize."

"Not going to try for it? Bless my slippers! Why not?  Isn't fifty
thousand dollars worth striving for? And, with the kind of a submarine
you say you have, you ought to be able to win."

"Yes, probably we could win," admitted the young inventor, "but we are
going to try for a better prize."

"A better one? I don't understand."

"Sunken treasure," explained Tom. "There's a ship sunk off the coast of
Uruguay, with three hundred thousand dollars in gold bullion aboard.
Dad and I are going to try to recover that in our submarine. We're
going to start day after to-morrow, and, if you like, you may go along."

"Go along! Of course I'll go along!" cried the eccentric man. "But I
never heard of such a thing. Sunken treasure!  Three hundred thousand
dollars in gold! My, what a lot of money! And to go after it in a
submarine! It's as good as a story!"

"Yes, we hope to recover all the treasure," said the lad.  "We ought to
be able to claim at least half of it."

"Bless my pocketbook!" cried Mr. Damon, but Tom did not hear him. At
that instant his attention was attracted by seeing two men emerge from
behind the sand dune near which he and Mr. Damon had halted
momentarily, when the youth explained about the treasure. The man
looked sharply at Tom.  A moment later the first man was joined by
another, and at the sight of him our hero could not repress an
exclamation of alarm. For the second man was none other than Addison
Berg.

The latter glanced quickly at Tom, and then, with a hasty word to his
companion, the two swung around and made off in the opposite direction
to that in which they had been walking.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Damon, seeing the young inventor was
strangely affected.

"That--that man," stammered the lad.

"You don't mean to tell me that was one the Happy Harry gang, do you?"

"No. But one, or both of those men, may prove to be worse.  That second
man was Addison Berg, and he's agent for a firm of submarine boat
builders who are rivals of dad's. Berg has been trying to find out why
we abandoned our intention of competing for the Government prize."

"I hope you didn't tell him."

"I didn't intend to," replied Tom, smiling grimly, "but I'm afraid I
have, however. He certainly overheard what I said. I spoke too loud.
Yes, he must have heard me. That's why he hurried off so."

"Possibly no harm is done. You didn't give the location of the sunken
ship."

"No; but I guess from what I said it will be easy enough to find. Well,
if we're going to have a fight for the possession of that sunken gold,
I'm ready for it. The Advance is well equipped for a battle. I must
tell dad of this. It's my fault."

"And partly mine, for asking you such leading questions in a public
place," declared Mr. Damon. "Bless my coat-tails, but I'm sorry! Maybe,
after all, those men were so interested in what they themselves were
saying that they didn't understand what you said."

But if there had been any doubts on this score they would have been
dissolved had Tom and his friend been able to see the actions of Mr.
Berg and his companion a little later.  The plans of the
treasure-hunters had been revealed to their ears.




Chapter Eight

Another Treasure Expedition


While Tom and Mr. Damon continued on to Atlantis after the oil, the
young inventor lamenting from time to time that his remarks about the
real destination of the Advance had been overheard by Mr. Berg, the
latter and his companion were hastening back along the path that ran on
one side of the sand dunes.

"What's your hurry?" asked Mr. Maxwell, who was with the submarine
agent. "You turned around as if you were shot when you saw that man and
the lad. There didn't appear to be any cause for such a hurry. From
what I could hear they were talking about a submarine. You're in the
same business. You might be friends."

"Yes, we might," admitted Mr. Berg with a peculiar smile; "but, unless
I'm very much mistaken, we're going to be rivals."

"Rivals? What do you mean?"

"I can't tell you now. Perhaps I may later. But if you don't mind, walk
a little faster, please. I want to get to a long-distance telephone."

"What for?"

"I have just overheard something that I wish to communicate to my
employers, Bentley & Eagert."

"Overheard something? I don't see what it could be, unless that lad--"

"You'll learn in good time," went on the submarine agent.  "But I must
telephone at once."

A little later the two men had reached a trolley line that ran into
Atlantis, and they arrived at the city before Mr. Damon and Tom got
there, as the latter had to go by a circuitous route. Mr. Berg lost no
time in calling up his firm by telephone.

"I have had another talk with Mr. Swift," he reported to Mr. Bentley,
who came to the instrument in Philadelphia.

"Well, what does he say?" was the impatient question. "I can't
understand his not wanting to try for the Government prize. It is
astonishing. You said you were going to discover the reason, Mr Berg,
but you haven't done so."

"I have."

"What is it?"

"Well, the reason Mr. Swift and his son don't care to try for the fifty
thousand dollar prize is that they are after one of three hundred
thousand dollars."

"Three hundred thousand dollars!" cried Mr. Bentley. "What government
is going to offer such a prize as that for submarines, when they are
getting almost as common as airships? We ought to have a try for that
ourselves. What government is it?"

"No government at all. But I think we ought to have a try for it, Mr.
Bentley."

"Explain."

"Well, I have just learned, most accidentally, that the Swifts are
going after sunken treasure--three hundred thousand dollars in gold
bullion."

"Sunken treasure? Where?

"I don't know exactly, but off the coast of Uruguay," and Mr. Berg
rapidly related what he had overheard Tom tell Mr. Damon. Mr. Bentley
was much excited and impatient for more details, but his agent could
not give them to him.

"Well," concluded the senior member of the firm of submarine boat
builders, "if the Swifts are going after treasure, so can we. Come to
Philadelphia at once, Mr. Berg, and we'll talk this matter over. There
is no time to lose.  We can afford to forego the Government prize for
the chance of getting a much larger one. We have as much right to
search for the sunken gold as the Swifts have. Come here at once, and
we will make our plans."

"All right," agreed the agent with a smile as he hung up the receiver.
"I guess," he murmured to himself, "that you won't be so high and
mighty with me after this, Tom Swift.  We'll see who has the best boat,
after all. We'll have a contest and a competition, but not for a
government prize.  It will be for the sunken gold."

It was easy to see that Mr. Berg was much pleased with himself.

Meanwhile, Tom and Mr. Damon had reached Atlantis, and had purchased
the oil. They started back, but Tom took a street leading toward the
center of the place, instead of striking for the beach path, along
which they had come.

"Where are you going?" asked Mr. Damon.

"I want to see if that Andy Foger has come back here," replied the lad,
and he told of having been shut in the tank by the bully.

"I've never properly punished him for that trick," he went on, "though
we did manage to burst his auto tires. I'm curious to know how he knew
enough to turn that gear and shut the tank door. He must have been
loitering near the shop, seen me go in the submarine alone, watched his
chance and sneaked in after me. But I'd like to get a complete
explanation, and if I once got hold of Andy I could make him talk," and
Tom clenched his fist in a manner that augured no good for the
squint-eyed lad. "He was stopping at the same hotel with Mr. Berg, and
he hurried away after the trick he played on me. I next saw him in
Shopton, but I thought perhaps he might have come back here. I'm going
to inquire at the hotel," he added.

Andy's name was not on the register since his hasty flight, however,
and Tom, after inquiring from the clerk and learning that Mr. Berg was
still a guest at the hostelry, rejoined Mr. Damon.

"Bless my hat!" exclaimed that eccentric individual as they started
back to the lonely beach where the submarine was awaiting her advent
into the water. "The more I think of the trip I'm going to take, the
more I like it."

"I hope you will," remarked Tom. "It will be a new experience for all
of us. There's only one thing worrying me, and that is about Mr. Berg
having overheard what I said."

"Oh, don't worry about that. Can't we slip away and leave no trace in
the water?"

"I hope so, but I must tell dad and Mr. Sharp about what happened."

The aged inventor was not a little alarmed at what his son related, but
he agreed with Mr. Damon, whom he heartily welcomed, that little was to
be apprehended from Berg and his employers.

"They know we're after a sunken wreck, but that's all they do know,"
said Tom's father. "We are only waiting for the arrival of Captain
Alden Weston, and then we will go. Even if Bentley & Eagert make a try
for the treasure we'll have the start of them, and this will be a case
of first come, first served. Don't worry, Tom. I'm glad you're going,
Mr Damon. Come, I will show you our submarine."

As father and son, with their guest, were going to the machine shop,
Mr. Sharp met them. He had a letter in his hand.

"Good news!" the balloonist cried. "Captain Weston will be with us
to-morrow. He will arrive at the Beach Hotel in Atlantis, and wants one
of us to meet him there. He has considerable information about the
wreck."

"The Beach Hotel," murmured Tom. "That is where Mr. Berg is stopping. I
hope he doesn't worm any of our secret from Captain Weston," and it was
with a feeling of uneasiness that the young inventor continued after
his father and Mr. Damon to where the submarine was.




Chapter Nine

Captain Weston's Advent


"Bless my water ballast, but that certainly is a fine boat!" cried Mr.
Damon, when he had been shown over the new craft.  "I think I shall
feel even safer in that than in the Red Cloud."

"Oh, don't go back on the airship!" exclaimed Mr Sharp. "I was counting
on taking you on another trip."

"Well, maybe after we get back from under the ocean," agreed Mr. Damon.
"I particularly like the cabin arrangements of the Advance. I think I
shall enjoy myself."

He would be hard to please who could not take pleasure from a trip in
the submarine. The cabin was particularly fine, and the sleeping
arrangements were good.

More supplies could be carried than was possible on the airship, and
there was more room in which to cook and serve food. Mr. Damon was fond
of good living, and the kitchen pleased him as much as anything else.

Early the next morning Tom set out for Atlantis, to meet Captain Weston
at the hotel. The young inventor inquired of the clerk whether the
seafaring man had arrived, and was told that he had come the previous
evening.

"Is he in his room?" asked Tom.

"No," answered the clerk with a peculiar grin. "He's an odd character.
Wouldn't go to bed last night until we had every window in his room
open, though it was blowing quite hard, and likely to storm. The
captain said he was used to plenty of fresh air. Well, I guess he got
it, all right."

"Where is he now?" asked the youth, wondering what sort of an
individual he was to meet.

"Oh, he was up before sunrise, so some of the scrubwomen told me. They
met him coming from his room, and he went right down to the beach with
a big telescope he always carries with him. He hasn't come back yet.
Probably he's down on the sand."

"Hasn't he had breakfast?"

"No. He left word he didn't want to eat until about four bells,
whatever time that is."

"It's ten o'clock," replied Tom, who had been studying up on sea terms
lately. "Eight bells is eight o'clock in the morning, or four in the
afternoon or eight at night, according to the time of day. Then there's
one bell for every half hour, so four bells this morning would be ten
o'clock in this watch, I suppose."

"Oh, that's the way it goes, eh?" asked the clerk. "I never could get
it through my head. What is twelve o'clock noon?"

"That's eight bells, too; so is twelve o'clock midnight.  Eight bells
is as high as they go on a ship. But I guess I'll go down and see if I
can meet the captain. It will soon be ten o'clock, or four bells, and
he must be hungry for breakfast. By the way, is that Mr. Berg still
here?"

"No; he went away early this morning. He and Captain Weston seemed to
strike up quite an acquaintance, the night clerk told me. They sat and
smoked together until long after midnight, or eight bells," and the
clerk smiled as he glanced down at the big diamond ring on his little
finger.

"They did?" fairly exploded Tom, for he had visions of what the wily
Mr. Berg might worm out of the simple captain.

"Yes. Why, isn't the captain a proper man to make friends with?" and
the clerk looked at Tom curiously.

"Oh, yes, of course," was the hasty answer. "I guess I'll go and see if
I can find him--the captain, I mean."

Tom hardly knew what to think. He wished his father, or Mr. Sharp, had
thought to warn Captain Weston against talking of the wreck. It might
be too late now.

The young inventor hurried to the beach, which was not far from the
hotel. He saw a solitary figure pacing up and down, and from the fact
that the man stopped, every now and then, and gazed seaward through a
large telescope, the lad concluded it was the captain for whom he was
in search. He approached, his footsteps making no sound on the sand.
The man was still gazing through the glass.

"Captain Weston?" spoke Tom.

Without a show of haste, though the voice must have startled him, the
captain turned. Slowly he lowered the telescope, and then he replied
softly:

"That's my name. Who are you, if I may ask?"

Tom was struck, more than by anything else, by the gentle voice of the
seaman. He had prepared himself, from the description of Mr. Sharp, to
meet a gruff, bewhiskered individual, with a voice like a crosscut saw,
and a rolling gait. Instead he saw a man of medium size, with a smooth
face, merry blue eyes, and the softest voice and gentlest manner
imaginable. Tom was very much disappointed. He had looked for a regular
sea-dog, and he met a landsman, as he said afterward. But it was not
long before our hero changed his mind regarding Captain Weston.

"I'm Tom Swift," the owner of that name said, "and I have been sent to
show you the way to where our ship is ready to launch." The young
inventor refrained from mentioning submarine, as it was the wish of Mr
Sharp to disclose this feature of the voyage to the sailor himself.

"Ha, I thought as much," resumed the captain quietly.  "It's a fine
day, if I may be permitted to say so," and he seemed to hesitate, as if
there was some doubt whether or not he might make that observation.

"It certainly is," agreed the lad. Then, with a smile he added: "It is
nearly four bells."

"Ha!" exclaimed the captain, also smiling, but even his manner of
saying "Ha!" was less demonstrative than that of most persons. "I
believe I am getting hungry, if I may be allowed the remark," and again
he seemed asking Tom's pardon for mentioning the fact.

"Perhaps you will come back to the cabin and have a little breakfast
with me," he went on. "I don't know what sort of a galley or cook they
have aboard the Beach Hotel, but it can't be much worse than some I've
tackled."

"No, thank you," answered the youth. "I've had my breakfast. But I'll
wait for you, and then I'd like to get back. Dad and Mr. Sharp are
anxious to meet you."

"And I am anxious to meet them, if you don't mind me mentioning it,"
was the reply, as the captain once more put the spyglass to his eye and
took an observation. "Not many sails in sight this morning," he added.
"But the weather is fine, and we ought to get off in good shape to hunt
for the treasure about which Mr. Sharp wrote me. I believe we are going
after treasure," he said; "that is, if you don't mind talking about it."

"Not in the least," replied Tom quickly, thinking this a good
opportunity for broaching a subject that was worrying him. "Did you
meet a Mr. Berg here last night, Captain Weston?" he went on.

"Yes. Mr. Berg and I had quite a talk. He is a well-informed man."

"Did he mention the sunken treasure?" asked the lad, eager to find out
if his suspicions were true.

"Yes, he did, if you'll excuse me putting it so plainly," answered the
seaman, as if Tom might be offended at so direct a reply. But the young
inventor was soon to learn that this was only an odd habit with the
seaman.

"Did he want to know where the wreck of the Boldero was located?"
continued the lad. "That is, did he try to discover if you knew
anything about it?"

"Yes," said Mr. Weston, "he did. He pumped me, if you are acquainted
with that term, and are not offended by it. You see, when I arrived
here I made inquiries as to where your father's place was located. Mr.
Berg overheard me, and introduced himself as agent for a shipbuilding
concern. He was very friendly, and when he said he knew you and your
parent, I thought he was all right."

Tom's heart sank. His worst fears were to be realized, he thought.

"Yes, he and I talked considerable, if I may be permitted to say so,"
went on the captain. "He seemed to know about the wreck of the Boldero,
and that she had three hundred thousand dollars in gold aboard. The
only thing he didn't know was where the wreck was located. He knew it
was off Uruguay somewhere, but just where he couldn't say. So he asked
me if I knew, since he must have concluded that I was going with you on
the gold-hunting expedition."

"And you do know, don't you?" asked Tom eagerly.

"Well, I have it pretty accurately charted out, if you will allow me
that expression," was the calm answer. "I took pains to look it up at
the request of Mr. Sharp."

"And he wanted to worm that information out of you?" inquired the youth
excitedly.

"Yes, I'm afraid he did."

"Did you give him the location?"

"Well," remarked the captain, as he took another observation before
closing up the telescope, "you see, while we were talking, I happened
to drop a copy of a map I'd made, showing the location of the wreck.
Mr. Berg picked it up to hand to me, and he looked at it."

"Oh!" cried Tom. "Then he knows just where the treasure is, and he may
get to it ahead of us. It's too bad."

"Yes," continued the seaman calmly, "Mr. Berg picked up that map, and
he looked very closely at the latitude and longitude I had marked as
the location of the wreck."

"Then he won't have any trouble finding it," murmured our hero.

"Eh? What's that?" asked the captain, "if I may be permitted to request
you to repeat what you said."

"I say he won't have any trouble locating the sunken Boldero," repeated
Tom.

"Oh, but I think he will, if he depends on that map," was the
unexpected reply. "You see," explained Mr. Weston, "I'm not so simple
as I look. I sensed what Mr. Berg was after, the minute he began to
talk to me. So I fixed up a little game on him. The map which I dropped
on purpose, not accidentally, where he would see it, did have the
location of the wreck marked. Only it didn't happen to be the right
location. It was about five hundred miles out of the way, and I rather
guess if Mr. Berg and his friends go there for treasure they'll find
considerable depth of water and quite a lonesome spot. Oh, no, I'm not
as easy as I look, if you don't mind me mentioning that fact; and when
a scoundrel sets out to get the best of me, I generally try to turn the
tables on him. I've seen such men as Mr. Berg before. I'm afraid, I'm
very much afraid, the sight he had of the fake map I made won't do him
much good. Well, I declare, it's past four bells. Let's go to
breakfast, if you don't mind me asking you," and with that the captain
started off up the beach, Tom following, his ideas all a whirl at the
unlooked-for outcome of the interview.




Chapter Ten

Trial of the Submarine


Tom felt such a relief at hearing of Captain Weston's ruse that his
appetite, sharpened by an early breakfast and the sea air, came to him
with a rush, and he had a second morning meal with the odd sea captain,
who chuckled heartily when he thought of how Mr Berg had been deceived.

"Yes," resumed Captain Weston, over his bacon and eggs, "I sized him up
for a slick article as soon as I laid eyes on him. But he evidently
misjudged me, if I may be permitted that term. Oh, well, we may meet
again, after we secure the treasure, and then I can show him the real
map of the location of the wreck."

"Then you have it?" inquired the lad eagerly.

Captain Weston nodded, before hiding his face behind a large cup of
coffee; his third, by the way.

"Let me see it?" asked Tom quickly. The captain set down his cup. He
looked carefully about the hotel dining-room.  There were several
guests, who, like himself, were having a late breakfast.

"It's a good plan," the sailor said slowly, "when you're going into
unknown waters, and don't want to leave a wake for the other fellow to
follow, to keep your charts locked up. If it's all the same to you," he
added diffidently, "I'd rather wait until we get to where your father
and Mr. Sharp are before displaying the real map. I've no objection to
showing you the one Mr. Berg saw," and again he chuckled.

The young inventor blushed at his indiscretion. He felt that the news
of the search for the treasure had leaked out through him, though he
was the one to get on the trail of it by seeing the article in the
paper. Now he had nearly been guilty of another break. He realized that
he must be more cautious. The captain saw his confusion, and said:

"I know how it is. You're eager to get under way. I don't blame you. I
was the same myself when I was your age. But we'll soon be at your
place, and then I'll tell you all I know. Sufficient now, to say that I
believe I have located the wreck within a few miles. I got on the track
of a sailor who had met one of the shipwrecked crew of the Boldero, and
he gave me valuable information. Now tell me about the craft we are
going in. A good deal depends on that."

Tom hardly knew what to answer. He recalled what Mr. Sharp had said
about not wanting to tell Captain Weston, until the last moment, that
they were going in a submarine, for fear the old seaman (for he was old
in point of service though not in years) might not care to risk an
under-water trip. Therefore Tom hesitated. Seeing it, Captain Weston
remarked quietly:

"I mean, what type is your submarine? Does it go by compressed air, or
water power?"

"How do you know it's a submarine?" asked the young inventor quickly,
and in some confusion.

"Easy enough. When Mr. Berg thought he was pumping me, I was getting a
lot of information from him. He told me about the submarine his firm
was building, and, naturally, he mentioned yours. One thing led to
another until I got a pretty good idea of your craft. What do you call
it?"

"The Advance."

"Good name. I like it, if you don't mind speaking of it."

"We were afraid you wouldn't like it," commented Tom.

"What, the name?"

"No, the idea of going in a submarine."

"Oh," and Captain Weston laughed. "Well, it takes more than that to
frighten me, if you'll excuse the expression.  I've always had a
hankering to go under the surface, after so many years spent on top.
Once or twice I came near going under, whether I wanted to or not, in
wrecks, but I think I prefer your way. Now, if you're all done, and
don't mind me speaking of it, I think we'll start for your place. We
must hustle, for Berg may yet get on our trail, even if he has got the
wrong route," and he laughed again.

It was no small relief to Mr Swift and Mr. Sharp to learn that Captain
Weston had no objections to a submarine, as they feared he might have.
The captain, in his diffident manner, made friends at once with the
treasure-hunters, and he and Mr. Damon struck up quite an acquaintance.
Tom told of his meeting with the seaman, and the latter related, with
much gusto, the story of how he had fooled Mr. Berg.

"Well, perhaps you'd like to come and take a look at the craft that is
to be our home while we're beneath the water," suggested Mr. Swift and
the sailor assenting, the aged inventor, with much pride, assisted by
Tom, pointed out on the Advance the features of interest. Captain
Weston gave hearty approval, making one or two minor suggestions, which
were carried out.

"And so you launch her to-morrow," he concluded, when he had completed
the inspection "Well, I hope it's a success, if I may be permitted to
say so."

There were busy times around the machine shop next day. So much secrecy
had been maintained that none of the residents, or visitors to the
coast resort, were aware that in their midst was such a wonderful craft
as the submarine. The last touches were put on the under-water ship;
the ways, leading from the shop to the creek, were well greased, and
all was in readiness for the launching. The tide would soon be at
flood, and then the boat would slide down the timbers (at least, that
was the hope of all), and would float in the element meant to receive
her. It was decided that no one should be aboard when the launching
took place, as there was an element of risk attached, since it was not
known just how buoyant the craft was. It was expected she would float,
until the filled tanks took her to the bottom, but there was no telling.

"It will be flood tide now in ten minutes," remarked Captain Weston
quietly, looking at his watch. Then he took an observation through the
telescope. "No hostile ships hanging in the offing," he reported. "All
is favorable, if you don't mind me saying so," and he seemed afraid
lest his remark might give offense.

"Get ready," ordered Mr. Swift. "Tom, see that the ropes are all
clear," for it had been decided to ease the Advance down into the water
by means of strong cables and windlasses, as the creek was so narrow
that the submarine, if launched in the usual way, would poke her nose
into the opposite mud bank and stick there.

"All clear," reported the young inventor.

"High tide!" exclaimed the captain a moment later, snapping shut his
watch.

"Let go!" ordered Mr. Swift, and the various windlasses manned by the
inventor, Tom and the others began to unwind their ropes. Slowly the
ship slid along the greased ways.  Slowly she approached the water. How
anxiously they all watched her! Nearer and nearer her blunt nose, with
the electric propulsion plate and the auxiliary propeller, came to the
creek, the waters of which were quiet now, awaiting the turn of the
tide.

Now little waves lapped the steel sides. It was the first contact of
the Advance with her native element.

"Pay out the rope faster!" cried Mr. Swift.

The windlasses were turned more quickly. Foot by foot the craft slid
along until, with a final rush, the stern left the ways and the
submarine was afloat. Now would come the test. Would she ride on an
even keel, or sink out of sight, or turn turtle? They all ran to the
water's edge, Tom in the lead.

"Hurrah!" suddenly yelled the lad, trying to stand on his head. "She
floats! She's a success! Come on! Let's get aboard!"

For, true enough, the Advance was riding like a duck on the water. She
had been proportioned just right, and her lines were perfect. She rode
as majestically as did any ship destined to sail on the surface, and
not intended to do double duty.

"Come on, we must moor her to the pier," directed Mr. Sharp. "The tide
will turn in a few minutes and take her out to sea."

He and Tom entered a small boat, and soon the submarine was tied to a
small dock that had been built for the purpose.

"Now to try the engine," suggested Mr. Swift, who was almost trembling
with eagerness; for the completion of the ship meant much to him.

"One moment," begged Captain Weston. "If you don't mind, I'll take an
observation," he went on, and he swept the horizon with his telescope.
"All clear," he reported. "I think we may go aboard and make a trial
trip."

Little time was lost in entering the cabin and engine-room, Garret
Jackson accompanying the party to aid with the machinery. It did not
take long to start the motors, dynamos and the big gasolene engine that
was the vital part of the craft. A little water was admitted to the
tanks for ballast, since the food and other supplies were not yet on
board. The Advance now floated with the deck aft of the conning tower
showing about two feet above the surface of the creek. Mr. Swift and
Tom entered the pilot house.

"Start the engines," ordered the aged inventor, "and we'll try my new
system of positive and negative electrical propulsion."

There was a hum and whir in the body of the ship beneath the feet of
Tom and his father. Captain Weston stood on the little deck near the
conning tower.

"All ready?" asked the youth through the speaking tube to Mr. Sharp and
Mr. Jackson in the engine-room.

"All ready," came the answer.

Tom threw over the connecting lever, while his father grasped the
steering wheel. The Advance shot forward, moving swiftly along, about
half submerged.

"She goes! She goes!" cried Tom.

"She certainly does, if I may be permitted to say so," was the calm
contribution of Captain Weston. "I congratulate you."

Faster and faster went the new craft. Mr. Swift headed her toward the
open sea, but stopped just before passing out of the creek, as he was
not yet ready to venture into deep water.

"I want to test the auxiliary propellers," he said. After a little
longer trial of the electric propulsion plates, which were found to
work satisfactorily, sending the submarine up and down the creek at a
fast rate, the screws, such as are used on most submarines, were put
into gear.  They did well, but were not equal to the plates, nor was so
much expected of them.

"I am perfectly satisfied," announced Mr. Swift as he once more headed
the boat to sea. "I think, Captain Weston, you had better go below now."

"Why so?"

"Because I am going to completely submerge the craft. Tom, close the
conning tower door. Perhaps you will come in here with us, Captain
Weston, though it will be rather a tight fit."

"Thank you, I will. I want to see how it feels to be in a pilot house
under water."

Tom closed the water-tight door of the conning tower. Word was sent
through the tube to the engine-room that a more severe test of the ship
was about to be made. The craft was now outside the line of breakers
and in the open sea.

"Is everything ready, Tom?" asked his father in a quiet voice.

"Everything," replied the lad nervously, for the anticipation of being
about to sink below the surface was telling on them all, even on the
calm, old sea captain.

"Then open the tanks and admit the water," ordered Mr. Swift.

His son turned a valve and adjusted some levers. There was a hissing
sound, and the Advance began sinking. She was about to dive beneath the
surface of the ocean, and those aboard her were destined to go through
a terrible experience before she rose again.




Chapter Eleven

On the Ocean Bed


Lower and lower sank the submarine. There was a swirling and foaming of
the water as she went down, caused by the air bubbles which the craft
carried with her in her descent.  Only the top of the conning tower was
out of water now, the ocean having closed over the deck and the rounded
back of the boat. Had any one been watching they would have imagined
that an accident was taking place.

In the pilot house, with its thick glass windows, Tom, his father and
Captain Weston looked over the surface of the ocean, which every minute
was coming nearer and nearer to them.

"We'll be all under in a few seconds," spoke Tom in a solemn voice, as
he listened to the water hissing into the tanks.

"Yes, and then we can see what sort of progress we will make," added
Mr. Swift. "Everything is going fine, though," he went on cheerfully.
"I believe I have a good boat."

"There is no doubt of it in my mind," remarked Captain Weston, and Tom
felt a little disappointed that the sailor did not shout out some such
expression as "Shiver my timbers!" or "Keel-haul the main braces,
there, you lubber!" But Captain Weston was not that kind of a sailor,
though his usually quiet demeanor could be quickly dropped on
necessity, as Tom learned later.

A few minutes more and the waters closed over the top of the conning
tower. The Advance was completely submerged.  Through the thick glass
windows of the pilot house the occupants looked out into the greenish
water that swirled about them; but it could not enter. Then, as the
boat went lower, the light from above gradually died out, and the
semi-darkness gave place to gloom.

"Turn on the electrics and the searchlight, Tom," directed his father.

There was the click of a switch, and the conning tower was flooded with
light. But as this had the effect of preventing the three from peering
out into the water, just as one in a lighted room cannot look out into
the night, Tom shut them off and switched on the great searchlight.
This projected its powerful beams straight ahead and there, under the
ocean, was a pathway of illumination for the treasure-seekers.

"Fine!" cried Captain Weston, with more enthusiasm than he had yet
manifested. "That's great, if you don't mind me mentioning it. How deep
are we?"

Tom glanced at a gage on the side of the pilot tower.

"Only about sixty feet," he answered.

"Then don't go any deeper!" cried the captain hastily. "I know these
waters around here, and that's about all the depth you've got. You'll
be on the bottom in a minute."

"I intend to get on the bottom after a while," said Mr. Swift, "but not
here. I want to try for a greater distance under water before I come to
rest on the ocean's bed. But I think we are deep enough for a test.
Tom, close the tank intake pipes and we'll see how the Advance will
progress when fully submerged."

The hissing stopped, and then, wishing to see how the motors and other
machinery would work, the aged inventor and his son, accompanied by
Captain Weston, descended from the conning tower, by means of an inner
stairway, to the interior of the ship. The submarine could be steered
and managed from below or above. She was now floating about sixty-five
feet below the surface of the bay.

"Well, how do you like it?" asked Tom of Mr. Damon, as he saw his
friend in an easy chair in the living-room or main cabin of the craft,
looking out of one of the plate-glass windows on the side.

"Bless my spectacles, it's the most wonderful thing I ever dreamed of!"
cried the queer character, as he peered at the mass of water before
him. "To think that I'm away down under the surface, and yet as dry as
a bone. Bless my necktie, but it's great! What are we going to do now?"

"Go forward," replied the young inventor.

"Perhaps I had better make an observation," suggested Captain Weston,
taking his telescope from under his arm, where he had carried it since
entering the craft, and opening it. "We may run afoul of something, if
you don't mind me mentioning such a disagreeable subject." Then, as he
thought of the impossibility of using his glass under water, he closed
it.

"I shall have little use for this here, I'm afraid," he remarked with a
smile. "Well, there's some consolation.  We're not likely to meet many
ships in this part of the ocean. Other vessels are fond enough of
remaining on the surface. I fancy we shall have the depths to
ourselves, unless we meet a Government submarine, and they are hardly
able to go as deep as we can. No, I guess we won't run into anything
and I can put this glass away."

"Unless we run into Berg and his crowd," suggested Tom in a low voice.

"Ha! ha!" laughed Captain Weston, for he did not want Mr. Swift to
worry over the unscrupulous agent. "No, I don't believe we'll meet
them, Tom. I guess Berg is trying to work out the longitude and
latitude I gave him. I wish I could see his face when he realizes that
he's been deceived by that fake map."

"Well, I hope he doesn't discover it too soon and trail us," went on
the lad. "But they're going to start the machinery now. I suppose you
and I had better take charge of the steering of the craft. Dad will
want to be in the engine-room."

"All right," replied the captain, and he moved forward with the lad to
a small compartment, shut off from the living-room, that served as a
pilot house when the conning tower was not used. The same levers,
wheels and valves were there as up above, and the submarine could be
managed as well from there as from the other place.

"Is everything all right?" asked Mr Swift as he went into the
engine-room, where Garret Jackson and Mr. Sharp were busy with oil cans.

"Everything," replied the balloonist. "Are you going to start now?"

"Yes, we're deep enough for a speed trial. We'll go out to sea,
however, and try for a lower depth record, as soon as there's enough
water. Start the engine."

A moment later the powerful electric currents were flowing into the
forward and aft plates, and the Advance began to gather way, forging
through the water.

"Straight ahead, out to sea, Tom," called his father to him.

"Aye, aye, sir," responded the youth.

"Ha! Quite seaman-like, if you don't mind a reference to it," commented
Captain Weston with a smile. "Mind your helm, boy, for you don't want
to poke her nose into a mud bank, or run up on a shoal."

"Suppose you steer?" suggested the lad. "I'd rather take lessons for a
while."

"All right. Perhaps it will be safer. I know these waters from the top,
though I can't say as much for the bottom.  However, I know where the
shoals are."

The powerful searchlight was turned, so as to send its beams along the
path which the submarine was to follow, and then, as she gathered
speed, she shot ahead, gliding through the waters like a fish.

Mr. Damon divided his time between the forward pilot-room, the
living-apartment, and the place where Mr. Swift, Garret Jackson and Mr.
Sharp were working over the engines. Every few minutes he would bless
some part of himself, his clothing, or the ship. Finally the old man
settled down to look through the plate-glass windows in the main
apartment.

On and on went the submarine. She behaved perfectly, and was under
excellent control. Some times Tom, at the request of his father, would
send her toward the surface by means of the deflecting rudder. Then she
would dive to the bottom again. Once, as a test, she was sent obliquely
to the surface, her tower just emerging, and then she darted downward
again, like a porpoise that had come up to roll over, and suddenly
concluded to seek the depths. In fact, had any one seen the maneuver
they would have imagined the craft was a big fish disporting itself.

Captain Weston remained at Tom's side, giving him instructions, and
watching the compass in order to direct the steering so as to avoid
collisions. For an hour or more the craft was sent almost straight
ahead at medium speed.  Then Mr. Swift, joining his son and the
captain, remarked:

"How about depth of water here, Captain Weston?"

"You've got more than a mile."

"Good! Then I'm going down to the bottom of the sea! Tom, fill the
tanks still more.

"Aye, aye, sir," answered the lad gaily. "Now for a new experience!"

"And use the deflecting rudder, also," advised his father.  "That will
hasten matters."

Five minutes later there was a slight jar noticeable.

"Bless my soul! What's that?" cried Mr. Damon. "Have we hit something?"

"Yes," answered Tom with a smile.

"What, for gracious sake?"

"The bottom of the sea. We're on the bed of the ocean."




Chapter Twelve

For a Breath of Air


They could hardly realize it, yet the depth-gage told the story. It
registered a distance below the surface of the ocean of five thousand
seven hundred feet--a little over a mile. The Advance had actually come
to rest on the bottom of the Atlantic.

"Hurrah!" cried Tom. "Let's get on the diving suits, dad, and walk
about on land under water for a change."

"No," said Mr. Swift soberly. "We will hardly have time for that now.
Besides, the suits are not yet fitted with the automatic air-tanks, and
we can't use them. There are still some things to do before we start on
our treasure cruise.  But I want to see how the plates are standing
this pressure."

The Advance was made with a triple hull, the spaces between the layers
of plates being filled with a secret material, capable of withstanding
enormous pressure, as were also the plates themselves. Mr. Swift, aided
by Mr. Jackson and Captain Weston, made a thorough examination, and
found that not a drop of water had leaked in, nor was there the least
sign that any of the plates had given way under the terrific strain.

"She's as tight as a drum, if you will allow me to make that
comparison," remarked Captain Weston modestly. "I couldn't ask for a
dryer ship."

"Well, let's take a look around by means the searchlight and the
observation windows, and then we'll go back," suggested Mr. Swift. "It
will take about two days to get the stores and provisions aboard and
rig up the diving suits; then we will start for the sunken treasure."

There were several powerful searchlights on the Advance, so arranged
that the bow, stern or either side could be illuminated independently.
There were also observation windows near each light.

In turn the powerful rays were cast first at the bow and then aft. In
the gleams could be seen the sandy bed of the ocean, covered with
shells of various kinds. Great crabs walked around on their long,
jointed legs, and Tom saw some lobsters that would have brought joy to
the heart of a fisherman.

"Look at the big fish!" cried Mr. Damon suddenly, and he pointed to
some dark, shadowy forms that swam up to the glass windows, evidently
puzzled by the light.

"Porpoises," declared Captain Weston briefly, "a whole school of them."

The fish seemed suddenly to multiply, and soon those in the submarine
felt curious tremors running through the whole craft.

"The fish are rubbing up against it," cried Tom. "They must think we
came down here to allow them to scratch their backs on the steel
plates."

For some time they remained on the bottom, watching the wonderful sight
of the fishes that swam all about them.

"Well, I think we may as well rise," announced Mr. Swift, after they
had been on the bottom about an hour, moving here and there. "We didn't
bring any provisions, and I'm getting hungry, though I don't know how
the others of you feel about it."

"Bless my dinner-plate, I could eat, too!" cried Mr. Damon. "Go up, by
all means. We'll get enough of under-water travel once we start for the
treasure."

"Send her up, Tom," called his father. "I want to make a few notes on
some needed changes and improvements."

Tom entered the lower pilot house, and turned the valve that opened the
tanks. He also pulled the lever that started the pumps, so that the
water ballast would be more quickly emptied, as that would render the
submarine buoyant, and she would quickly shoot to the surface. To the
surprise of the lad, however, there followed no outrushing of the
water. The Advance remained stationary on the ocean bed. Mr. Swift
looked up from his notes.

"Didn't you hear me ask you to send her up, Tom?" he inquired mildly.

"I did, dad, but something seems to be the matter," was the reply.

"Matter? What do you mean?" and the aged inventor hastened to where his
son and Captain Weston were at the wheels, valves and levers.

"Why, the tanks won't empty, and the pumps don't seem to work."

"Let me try," suggested Mr. Swift, and he pulled the various handles.
There was no corresponding action of the machinery.

"That's odd," he remarked in a curious voice "Perhaps something has
gone wrong with the connections. Go look in the engine-room, and ask
Mr. Sharp if everything is all right there."

Tom made a quick trip, returning to report that the dynamos, motors and
gas engine were running perfectly.

"Try to work the tank levers and pumps from the conning tower,"
suggested Captain Weston. "Sometimes I've known the steam steering gear
to play tricks like that."

Tom hurried up the circular stairway into the tower. He pulled the
levers and shifted the valves and wheels there.  But there was no
emptying of the water tanks. The weight and pressure of water in them
still held the submarine on the bottom of the sea, more than a mile
from the surface. The pumps in the engine-room were working at top
speed, but there was evidently something wrong in the connections.  Mr.
Swift quickly came to this conclusion.

"We must repair it at once," he said. "Tom, come to the engine-room.
You and I, with Mr. Jackson and Mr. Sharp, will soon have it in shape
again."

"Is there any danger?" asked Mr. Damon in a perturbed voice. "Bless my
soul, it's unlucky to have an accident on our trial trip."

"Oh, we must expect accidents," declared Mr. Swift with a smile. "This
is nothing."

But it proved to be more difficult than he had imagined to re-establish
the connection between the pumps and the tanks. The valves, too, had
clogged or jammed, and as the pressure outside the ship was so great,
the water would not run out of itself. It must be forced.

For an hour or more the inventor, his son and the others, worked away.
They could accomplish nothing. Tom looked anxiously at his parent when
the latter paused in his efforts.

"Don't worry," advised the aged inventor. "It's got to come right
sooner or later."

Just then Mr. Damon, who had been wandering about the ship, entered the
engine-room.

"Do you know," he said, "you ought to open a window, or something."

"Why, what's the matter?" asked Tom quickly, looking to see if the odd
man was joking.

"Well, of course I don't exactly mean a window," explained Mr. Damon,
"but we need fresh air."

"Fresh air!" There was a startled note in Mr. Swift's voice as he
repeated the words.

"Yes, I can hardly breathe in the living-room, and it's not much better
here."

"Why, there ought to be plenty of fresh air," went on the inventor. "It
is renewed automatically."

Tom jumped up and looked at an indicator. He uttered a startled cry.

"The air hasn't been changed in the last hour!" he exclaimed. "It is
bad. There's not enough oxygen in it. I notice it, now that I've
stopped working. The gage indicates it, too. The automatic air-changer
must have stopped working. I'll fix it."

He hurried to the machine which was depended on to supply fresh air to
the submarine.

"Why, the air tanks are empty!" the young inventor cried.  "We haven't
any more air except what is in the ship now!"

"And we're rapidly breathing that up," added Captain Weston solemnly.

"Can't you make more?" cried Mr. Damon. "I thought you said you could
make oxygen aboard the ship."

"We can," answered Mr. Swift, "but I did not bring along a supply of
the necessary chemicals. I did not think we would be submerged long
enough for that. But there should have been enough in the reserve tank
to last several days. How about it, Tom?"

"It's all leaked out, or else it wasn't filled," was the despairing
answer. "All the air we have is what's in the ship, and we can't make
more."

The treasure-seekers looked at each other. It was an awful situation.

"Then the only thing to do is to fix the machinery and rise to the
surface," said Mr. Sharp simply. "We can have all the air we want,
then."

"Yes, but the machinery doesn't seem possible of being fixed," spoke
Tom in a low voice.

"We must do it!" cried his father.

They set to work again with fierce energy, laboring for their very
lives. They all knew that they could not long remain in the ship
without oxygen. Nor could they desert it to go to the surface, for the
moment they left the protection of the thick steel sides the terrible
pressure of the water would kill them. Nor were the diving suits
available. They must stay in the craft and die a miserable death--unless
the machinery could be repaired and the Advance sent to the surface.
The emergency expanding lifting tank was not yet in working order.

More frantically they toiled, trying every device that was suggested to
the mechanical minds of Tom, his father, Mr. Sharp or Mr. Jackson, to
make the pumps work. But something was wrong. More and more foul grew
the air. They were fairly gasping now. It was  difficult to breathe, to
say nothing of working, in that atmosphere. The thought of their
terrible position was in the minds of all.

"Oh, for one breath of fresh air!" cried Mr. Damon, who seemed to
suffer more than any of the others. Grim death was hovering around
them, imprisoned as they were on the ocean's bed, over a mile from the
surface.




Chapter Thirteen

Off for the Treasure


Suddenly Tom, after a moment's pause, seized a wrench and began
loosening some nuts.

"What are you doing?" asked his father faintly, for he was being
weakened by the vitiated atmosphere.

"I'm going to take this valve apart," replied his son. "We haven't
looked there for the trouble. Maybe it's out of order."

He attacked the valve with energy, but his hands soon lagged. The lack
of oxygen was telling on him. He could no longer work quickly.

"I'll help," murmured Mr. Sharp thickly. He took a wrench, but no
sooner had he loosened one nut than he toppled over.  "I'm all in," he
murmured feebly.

"Is he dead?" cried Mr. Damon, himself gasping.

"No, only fainted. But he soon will be dead, and so will all of us, if
we don't get fresh air," remarked Captain Weston. "Lie down on the
floor, every one. There is a little fairly good air there. It's heavier
than the air we've breathed, and we can exist on it for a little
longer. Poor Sharp was so used to breathing the rarified air of high
altitudes that he can't stand this heavy atmosphere."

Mr. Damon was gasping worse than ever, and so was Mr. Swift. The
balloonist lay an inert heap on the floor, with Captain Weston trying
to force a few drops of stimulant down his throat.

With a fierce determination in his heart, but with fingers that almost
refused to do his bidding, Tom once more sought to open the big valve.
He felt sure the trouble was located there, as they had tried to locate
it in every other place without avail.

"I'll help," said Mr. Jackson in a whisper. He, too, was hardly able to
move.

More and more devoid of oxygen grew the air. It gave Tom a sense as if
his head was filled, and ready to burst with every breath he drew.
Still he struggled to loosen the nuts.  There were but four more now,
and he took off three while Mr. Jackson removed one. The young inventor
lifted off the valve cover, though it felt like a ton weight to him. He
gave a glance inside.

"Here's the trouble!" he murmured. "The valve's clogged.  No wonder it
wouldn't work. The pumps couldn't force the water out."

It was the work of only a minute to adjust the valve. Then Tom and the
engineer managed to get the cover back on.

How they inserted the bolts and screwed the nuts in place they never
could remember clearly afterward, but they managed it somehow, with
shaking, trembling hands and eyes that grew more and more dim.

"Now start the pumps!" cried Tom faintly. "The tanks will be emptied,
and we can get to the surface."

Mr. Sharp was still unconscious, nor was Mr. Swift able to help. He lay
with his eyes closed. Garret Jackson, however, managed to crawl to the
engine-room, and soon the clank of machinery told Tom that the pumps
were in motion. The lad staggered to the pilot house and threw the
levers over. An instant later there was the hissing of water as it
rushed from the ballast tanks. The submarine shivered, as though
disliking to leave the bottom of the sea, and then slowly rose. As the
pumps worked more rapidly, and the sea was sent from the tank in great
volumes, the boat fairly shot to the surface. Tom was ready to open the
conning tower and let in fresh air as soon as the top was above the
surface.

With a bound the Advance reached the top. Tom frantically worked the
worm gear that opened the tower. In rushed the fresh, life-giving air,
and the treasure-hunters filled their lungs with it.

And it was only just in time, for Mr. Sharp was almost gone. He quickly
revived, as did the others, when they could breathe as much as they
wished of the glorious oxygen.

"That was a close call," commented Mr. Swift. "We'll not go below again
until I have provided for all emergencies. I should have seen to the
air tanks and the expanding one before going below. We'll sail home on
the surface now."

The submarine was put about and headed for her dock. On the way she
passed a small steamer, and the passengers looked down in wonder at the
strange craft.

When the Advance reached the secluded creek where she had been
launched, her passengers had fully recovered from their terrible
experience, though the nerves of Mr. Swift and Mr. Damon were not at
ease for some days thereafter.

"I should never have made a submerged test without making sure that we
had a reserve supply of air," remarked the aged inventor. "I will not
be caught that way again. But I can't understand how the pump valve got
out of order."

"Maybe some one tampered with it," suggested Mr. Damon.  "Could Andy
Foger, any of the Happy Harry gang, or the rival gold-seekers have done
it?"

"I hardly think so," answered Tom. "The place has been too carefully
guarded since Berg and Andy once sneaked in. I think it was just an
accident, but I have thought of a plan whereby such accidents can be
avoided in the future. It needs a simple device."

"Better patent it," suggested Mr. Sharp with a smile.

"Maybe I will," replied the young inventor. "But not now.  We haven't
time, if we intend to get fitted out for our trip."

"No; I should say the sooner we started the better," remarked Captain
Weston. "That is, if you don't mind me speaking about it," he added
gently, and the others smiled, for his diffident comments were only a
matter of habit.

The first act of the adventurers, after tying the submarine at the
dock, was to proceed with the loading of the food and supplies. Tom and
Mr. Damon looked to this, while Mr. Swift and Mr. Sharp made some
necessary changes to the machinery. The next day the young inventor
attached his device to the pump valve, and the loading of the craft was
continued.

All was in readiness for the gold-seeking expedition a week later.
Captain Weston had carefully charted the route they were to follow, and
it was decided to move along on the surface for the first day, so as to
get well out to sea before submerging the craft. Then it would sink
below the surface, and run along under the water until the wreck was
reached, rising at times, as needed, to renew the air supply.

With sufficient stores and provisions aboard to last several months, if
necessary, though they did not expect to be gone more than sixty days
at most, the adventurers arose early one morning and went down to the
dock. Mr. Jackson was not to accompany them. He did not care about a
submarine trip, he said, and Mr. Swift desired him to remain at the
seaside cottage and guard the shops, which contained much valuable
machinery. The airship was also left there.

"Well, are we all ready?" asked Mr. Swift of the little party of
gold-seekers, as they were about to enter the conning tower hatchway of
the submarine.

"All ready, dad," responded his son.

"Then let's get aboard," proposed Captain Weston. "But first let me
take an observation."

He swept the horizon with his telescope, and Tom noticed that the
sailor kept it fixed on one particular spot for some time.

"Did you see anything?" asked the lad.

"Well, there is a boat lying off there," was the answer.  "And some one
is observing us through a glass. But I don't believe it matters.
Probably they're only trying to see what sort of an odd fish we are."

"All aboard, then," ordered Mr. Swift, and they went into the
submarine. Tom and his father, with Captain Weston, remained in the
conning tower. The signal was given, the electricity flowed into the
forward and aft plates, and the Advance shot ahead on the surface.

The sailor raised his telescope once more and peered through a window
in the tower. He uttered an exclamation.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom.

"That other ship--a small steamer--is weighing anchor and seems to be
heading this way," was the reply.

"Maybe it's some one hired by Berg to follow us and trace our
movements," suggested Tom.

"If it is we'll fool them," added his father. "Just keep an eye on
them, captain, and I think we can show them a trick or two in a few
minutes."

Faster shot the Advance through the water. She had started on her way
to get the gold from the sunken wreck, but already enemies were on the
trail of the adventurers, for the ship the sailor had noticed was
steaming after them.




Chapter Fourteen

In the Diving Suits


There was no doubt that the steamer was coming after the submarine.
Several observations Captain Weston made confirmed this, and he
reported the fact to Mr. Swift.

"Well, we'll change our plans, then," said the inventor.  "Instead of
sailing on the surface we'll go below. But first let them get near so
they may have the benefit of seeing what we do. Tom, go below, please,
and tell Mr. Sharp to get every thing in readiness for a quick descent.
We'll slow up a bit now, and let them get nearer to us."

The speed of the submarine was reduced, and in a short time the strange
steamer had overhauled her, coming to within hailing distance.

Mr. Swift signaled for the machinery to stop and the submarine came to
a halt on the surface, bobbing about like a half-submerged bottle. The
inventor opened a bull's-eye in the tower, and called to a man on the
bridge of the steamer:

"What are you following us for?"

"Following you?" repeated the man, for the strange vessel had also come
to a stop. "We're not following you."

"It looks like it," replied Mr. Swift. "You'd better give it up."

"I guess the waters are free," was the quick retort.  "We'll follow you
if we like."

"Will you? Then come on!" cried the inventor as he quickly closed the
heavy glass window and pulled a lever. An instant later the submarine
began to sink, and Mr. Swift could not help laughing as, just before
the tower went under water, he had a glimpse of the astonished face of
the man on the bridge. The latter had evidently not expected such a
move as that.

Lower and lower in the water went the craft, until it was about two
hundred feet below the surface. Then Mr. Swift left the conning tower,
descended to the main part of the ship, and asked Tom and Captain
Weston to take charge of the pilot house.

"Send her ahead, Tom," his father said. "That fellow up above is
rubbing his eyes yet, wondering where we are, I suppose."

Forward shot the Advance under water, the powerful electrical plates
pulling and pushing her on the way to secure the sunken gold.

All that morning a fairly moderate rate of speed was maintained, as it
was thought best not to run the new machinery too fast.

Dinner was eaten about a quarter of a mile below the surface, but no
one inside the submarine would ever have known it. Electric lights made
the place as brilliant as could be desired, and the food, which Tom and
Mr. Damon prepared, was equal to any that could have been served on
land. After the meal they opened the shutters over the windows in the
sides of the craft, and looked at the myriads of fishes swimming past,
as the creatures were disclosed in the glare of the searchlight.

That night they were several hundred miles on their journey, for the
craft was speedy, and leaving Tom and Captain Weston to take the first
watch, the others went to bed.

"Bless my soul, but it does seem odd, though, to go to bed under water,
like a fish," remarked Mr. Damon. "If my wife knew this she would worry
to death. She thinks I'm off automobiling. But this isn't half as
dangerous as riding in a car that's always getting out of order. A
submarine for mine, every time."

"Wait until we get to the end of this trip," advised Tom.  "I guess
you'll find almost as many things can happen in a submarine as can in
an auto," and future events were to prove the young inventor to be
right.

Everything worked well that night, and the ship made good progress.
They rose to the surface the next morning to make sure of their
position, and to get fresh air, though they did not really need the
latter, as the reserve supply had not been drawn on, and was sufficient
for several days, now that the oxygen machine had been put in running
order.

On the second day the ship was sent to the bottom and halted there, as
Mr. Swift wished to try the new diving suits. These were made of a new,
light, but very strong metal to withstand the pressure of a great depth.

Tom, Mr. Sharp and Captain Weston donned the suits, the others agreeing
to wait until they saw how the first trial resulted. Then, too, it was
necessary for some one acquainted with the machinery to remain in the
ship to operate the door and water chamber through which the divers had
to pass to get out.

The usual plan, with some changes, was followed in letting the three
out of the boat, and on to the bottom of the sea.  They entered a
chamber in the side of the submarine, water was gradually admitted
until it equaled in pressure that outside, then an outer door was
opened by means of levers, and they could step out.

It was a curious sensation to Tom and the others to feel that they were
actually walking along the bed of the ocean.  All around them was the
water, and as they turned on the small electric lights in their
helmets, which lights were fed by storage batteries fastened to the
diving suits, they saw the fish, big and little, swarm up to them,
doubtless astonished at the odd creatures which had entered their
domain. On the sand of the bottom, and in and out among the shells and
rocks, crawled great spider crabs, big eels and other odd creatures
seldom seen on the surface of the water.  The three divers found no
difficulty in breathing, as there were air tanks fastened to their
shoulders, and a constant supply of oxygen was fed through pipes into
the helmets. The pressure of water did not bother them, and after the
first sensation Tom began to enjoy the novelty of it. At first the
inability to speak to his companions seemed odd, but he soon got so he
could make signs and motions, and be understood.

They walked about for some time, and once the lad came upon a part of a
wrecked vessel buried deep in the sand.  There was no telling what ship
it was, nor how long it had been there, and after silently viewing it,
they continued on.

"It was great!" were the first words Tom uttered when he and the others
were once more inside the submarine and had removed the suits. "If we
can only walk around the wreck of the Boldero that way, we'll have all
the gold out of her in no time. There are no life-lines nor air-hose to
bother with in these diving suits."

"They certainly are a success," conceded Mr. Sharp.

"Bless my topknot!" cried Mr. Damon. "I'll try it next time. I've
always wanted to be a diver, and now I have the chance."

The trip was resumed after the diving chamber had been closed, and on
the third day Captain Weston announced, after a look at his chart, that
they were nearing the Bahama Islands.

"We'll have to be careful not to run into any of the small keys," he
said, that being the name for the many little points of land, hardly
large enough to be dignified by the name of island. "We must keep a
constant lookout."

Fortune favored them, though once, when Tom was steering, he narrowly
avoided ramming a coral reef with the submarine.  The searchlight
showed it to him just in time, and he sheered off with a thumping in
his heart.

The course was changed from south to east, so as to get ready to swing
out of the way of the big shoulder of South America where Brazil takes
up so much room, and as they went farther and farther toward the
equator, they noticed that the waters teemed more and more with fish,
some beautiful, some ugly and fear-inspiring, and some such monsters
that it made one shudder to look at them, even through the thick glass
of the bulls-eye windows.




Chapter Fifteen

At the Tropical Island


It was on the evening of the fourth day later that Captain Weston, who
was steering the craft, suddenly called out:

"Land ho!"

"Where away?" inquired Tom quickly, for he had read that this was the
proper response to make.

"Dead ahead," answered the sailor with a smile. "Shall we make for it,
if I may be allowed the question?"

"What land is it likely to be?" Mr. Swift wanted to know.

"Oh, some small tropical island," replied the seafaring man. "It isn't
down on the charts. Probably it's too small to note. I should say it
was a coral island, but we may be able to find a spring of fresh water
there, and some fruit."

"Then we'll land there," decided the inventor. "We can use some fresh
water, though our distilling and ice apparatus does very well."

They made the island just at dusk, and anchored in a little lagoon,
where there was a good depth of water.

"Now for shore!" cried Tom, as the submarine swung around on the chain.
"It looks like a fine place. I hope there are cocoanuts and oranges
here. Shall I get out the electric launch, dad?"

"Yes, you may, and we'll all go ashore. It will do us good to stretch
our legs a bit."

Carried in a sort of pocket on the deck of the submarine was a small
electric boat, capable of holding six. It could be slid from the
pocket, or depression, into the water without the use of davits, and,
with Mr. Sharp to aid him, Tom soon had the little craft afloat. The
batteries were already charged, and just as the sun was going down the
gold-seekers entered the launch and were soon on shore.

They found a good spring of water close at hand, and Tom's wish
regarding the cocoanuts was realized, though there were no oranges. The
lad took several of the delicious nuts, and breaking them open poured
the milk into a collapsible cup he carried, drinking it eagerly. The
others followed his example, and pronounced it the best beverage they
had tasted in a long time.

The island was a typical tropical one, not very large, and it did not
appear to have been often visited by man. There were no animals to be
seen, but myriads of birds flew here and there amid the trees, the
trailing vines and streamers of moss.

"Let's spend a day here to-morrow and explore it," proposed Tom, and
his father nodded an assent. They went back to the submarine as night
was beginning to gather, and in the cabin, after supper, talked over
the happenings of their trip so far.

"Do you think we'll have any trouble getting the gold out of the
wrecked vessel?" asked Tom of Captain Weston, after a pause.

"Well, it's hard to say. I couldn't learn just how the wreck lays,
whether it's on a sandy or a rocky bottom. If the latter, it won't be
so hard, but if the sand has worked in and partly covered it, we'll
have some difficulties, if I may be permitted to say so. However, don't
borrow trouble.  We're not there yet, though at the rate we're
traveling it won't be long before we arrive."

No watch was set that night, as it was not considered necessary. Tom
was the first to arise in the morning, and he went out on the deck for
a breath of fresh air before breakfast.

He looked off at the beautiful little island, and as his eye took in
all of the little lagoon where the submarine was anchored he uttered a
startled cry.

And well he might, for, not a hundred yards away, and nearer to the
island than was the Advance, floated another craft--another craft,
almost similar in shape and size to the one built by the Swifts. Tom
rubbed his eyes to make sure he was not seeing double. No, there could
be no mistake about it. There was another submarine at the tropical
island.

As he looked, some one emerged from the conning tower of the second
craft. The figure seemed strangely familiar. Tom knew in a moment who
it was--Addison Berg. The agent saw the lad, too, and taking off his
cap and making a mocking bow, he called out:

"Good morning! Have you got the gold yet?"

Tom did not know what to answer. Seeing the other submarine, at an
island where he had supposed they would not be disturbed, was
disconcerting enough, but to be greeted by Berg was altogether too
much, Tom thought. His fears that the rival boat builders would follow
had not been without foundation.

"Rather surprised to see us, aren't you?" went on Mr. Berg, smiling.

"Rather," admitted Tom, choking over the word.

"Thought you'd be," continued Berg. "We didn't expect to meet you so
soon, but we're glad we did. I don't altogether like hunting for sunken
treasure, with such indefinite directions as I have."

"You--are going to--" stammered Tom, and then he concluded it would be
best not to say anything. But his talk had been heard inside the
submarine. His father came to the foot of the conning tower stairway.

"To whom are you speaking, Tom?" he asked.

"They're here, dad," was the youth's answer.

"Here? Who are here?"

"Berg and his employers. They've followed us, dad."




Chapter Sixteen

"We'll Race You For It"


Mr. Swift hurried up on deck. He was accompanied by Captain Weston. At
the sight of Tom's father, Mr. Berg, who had been joined by two other
men, called out:

"You see we also concluded to give up the trial for the Government
prize, Mr. Swift. We decided there was more money in something else.
But we still will have a good chance to try the merits of our
respective boats. We hurried and got ours fitted up almost as soon as
you did yours, and I think we have the better craft."

"I don't care to enter into any competition with you," said Mr. Swift
coldly.

"Ah, but I'm afraid you'll have to, whether you want to or not," was
the insolent reply.

"What's that?  Do you mean to force this matter upon me?"

"I'm afraid I'll have to--my employers and I, that is. You see, we
managed to pick up your trail after you left the Jersey coast, having
an idea where you were bound, and we don't intend to lose you now."

"Do you mean to follow us?" asked Captain Weston softly.

"Well, you can put it that way if you like," answered one of the two
men with Mr. Berg.

"I forbid it!" cried Mr. Swift hotly. "You have no right to sneak after
us."

"I guess the ocean is free," continued the rascally agent.

"Why do you persist in keeping after us?" inquired the aged inventor,
thinking it well to ascertain, if possible, just how much the men knew.

"Because we're after that treasure as well as you," was the bold reply.
"You have no exclusive right to it. The sunken ship is awaiting the
first comer, and whoever gets there first can take the gold from the
wreck. We intend to be there first, but we'll be fair with you."

"Fair? What do you mean?" demanded Tom.

"This: We'll race you for it. The first one to arrive will have the
right to search the wreck for the gold bullion. Is that fair? Do you
agree to it?"

"We agree to nothing with you," interrupted Captain Weston, his usual
diffident manner all gone. "I happen to be in partial command of this
craft, and I warn you that if I find you interfering with us it won't
be healthy for you.  I'm not fond of fighting, but when I begin I don't
like to stop," and he smiled grimly. "You'd better not follow us."

"We'll do as we please," shouted the third member of the trio on the
deck of the other boat, which, as Tom could see, was named the Wonder.
"We intend to get that gold if we can."

"All right. I've warned you," went on the sailor, and then, motioning
to Tom and his father to follow, he went below.

"Well, what's to be done?" asked Mr. Swift when they were seated in the
living-room, and had informed the others of the presence of the rival
submarine.

"The only thing I see to do is to sneak away unobserved, go as deep as
possible, and make all haste for the wreck," advised the captain. "They
will depend on us, for they have evidently no chart of the wreck,
though of course the general location of it may be known to them from
reading the papers. I hoped I had thrown them off the track by the
false chart I dropped, but it seems they were too smart for us."

"Have they a right to follow us?" asked Tom.

"Legally, but not morally. We can't prevent them, I'm afraid. The only
thing to do is to get there ahead of them.  It will be a race for the
sunken treasure, and we must get there first."

"What do you propose doing, captain?" asked Mr. Damon.  "Bless my
shirt-studs, but can't we pull their ship up on the island and leave it
there?"

"I'm afraid such high-handed proceedings would hardly answer," replied
Mr. Swift. "No, as Captain Weston says, we must get there ahead of
them. What do you think will be the best scheme, captain?"

"Well, there's no need for us to forego our plan to get fresh water.
Suppose we go to the island, that is, some of us, leaving a guard on
board here. We'll fill our tanks with fresh water, and at night we'll
quietly sink below the surface and speed away."

They all voted that an excellent idea, and little time was lost putting
it into operation.

All the remainder of that day not a sign of life was visible about the
Wonder. She lay inert on the surface of the lagoon, not far away from
the Advance; but, though no one showed himself on the deck, Tom and his
friends had no doubt but that their enemies were closely watching them.

As dusk settled down over the tropical sea, and as the shadows of the
trees on the little island lengthened, those on board the Advance
closed the Conning tower. No lights were turned on, as they did not
want their movements to be seen, but Tom, his father and Mr. Sharp took
their positions near the various machines and apparatus, ready to open
the tanks and let the submarine sink to the bottom, as soon as it was
possible to do this unobserved.

"Luckily there's no moon," remarked Captain Weston, as he took his
place beside Tom. "Once below the surface and we can defy them to find
us. It is odd how they traced us, but I suppose that steamer gave them
the clue."

It rapidly grew dark, as it always does in the tropics, and when a
cautious observation from the conning tower did not disclose the
outlines of the other boat, those aboard the Advance rightly concluded
that their rivals were unable to see them.

"Send her down, Tom," called his father, and with a hiss the water
entered the tanks. The submarine quickly sank below the surface, aided
by the deflecting rudder.

But alas for the hopes of the gold-seekers. No sooner was she
completely submerged, with the engine started so as to send her out of
the lagoon and to the open sea, than the waters all about were made
brilliant by the phosphorescent phenomenon. In southern waters this
frequently occurs.  Millions of tiny creatures, which, it is said,
swarm in the warm currents, give an appearance of fire to the ocean,
and any object moving through it can plainly be seen. It was so with
the Advance. The motion she made in shooting forward, and the
undulations caused by her submersion, seemed to start into activity the
dormant phosphorus, and the submarine was afloat in a sea of fire.

"Quick!" cried Tom. "Speed her up! Maybe we can get out of this patch
of water before they see us."

But it was too late. Above them they could hear the electric siren of
the Wonder as it was blown to let them know that their escape had been
noticed. A moment later the water, which acted as a sort of
sounding-board, or telephone, brought to the ears of Tom Swift and his
friends the noise of the engines of the other craft in operation.  She
was coming after them. The race for the possession of three hundred
thousand dollars in gold was already under way. Fate seemed against
those on board the Advance.




Chapter Seventeen

The Race


Directed by Captain Weston, who glanced at the compass and told him
which way to steer to clear the outer coral reef, Tom sent the
submarine ahead, signaling for full speed to the engine-room, where his
father and Mr. Sharp were. The big dynamos purred like great cats, as
they sent the electrical energy into the forward and aft plates,
pulling and pushing the Advance forward. On and on she rushed under
water, but ever as she shot ahead the disturbance in the phosphorescent
water showed her position plainly. She would be easy to follow.

"Can't you get any more speed out of her?" asked the captain of the lad.

"Yes," was the quick reply; "by using the auxiliary screws I think we
can. I'll try it."

He signaled for the propellers, forward and aft, to be put in
operation, and the motor moving the twin screws was turned on. At once
there was a perceptible increase to the speed of the Advance.

"Are we leaving them behind?" asked Tom anxiously, as he glanced at the
speed gage, and noted that the submarine was now about five hundred
feet below the surface.

"Hard to tell," replied the Captain. "You'd have to take an observation
to make sure."

"I'll do it," cried the youth. "You steer, please, and I'll go in the
conning tower. I can look forward and aft there, as well as straight
up. Maybe I can see the Wonder."

Springing up the circular ladder leading into the tower, Tom glanced
through the windows all about the small pilot house. He saw a curious
sight. It was as if the submarine was in a sea of yellowish liquid
fire. She was immersed in water which glowed with the flames that
contained no heat.  So light was it, in fact, that there was no need of
the incandescents in the tower. The young inventor could have seen to
read a paper by the illumination of the phosphorus.  But he had
something else to do than observe this phenomenon. He wanted to see if
he could catch sight of the rival submarine.

At first he could make out nothing save the swirl and boiling of the
sea, caused by the progress of the Advance through it. But suddenly, as
he looked up, he was aware of some great, black body a little to the
rear and about ten feet above his craft.

"A shark!" he exclaimed aloud. "An immense one, too."

But the closer he looked the less it seemed like a shark.  The position
of the black object changed. It appeared to settle down, to be
approaching the top of the conning tower.  Then, with a suddenness that
unnerved him for the time being, Tom recognized what it was; it was the
underside of a ship. He could see the plates riveted together, and
then, as he noted the rounded, cylindrical shape, he knew that it was a
submarine. It was the Wonder. She was close at hand and was creeping up
on the Advance. But, what was more dangerous, she seemed to be slowly
settling in the water.  Another moment and her great screws might crash
into the Conning tower of the Swifts' boat and shave it off. Then the
water would rush in, drowning the treasure-seekers like rats in a trap.

With a quick motion Tom yanked over the lever that allowed more water
to flow into the ballast tanks. The effect was at once apparent. The
Advance shot down toward the bottom of the sea. At the same time the
young inventor signaled to Captain Weston to notify those in the
engine-room to put on a little more speed. The Advance fairly leaped
ahead, and the lad, looking up through the bull's-eye in the roof of
the conning tower, had the satisfaction of seeing the rival submarine
left behind.

The youth hurried down into the interior of the ship to tell what he
had seen, and explain the reason for opening the ballast tanks. He
found his father and Mr. Sharp somewhat excited over the unexpected
maneuver of the craft.

"So they're still following us," murmured Mr. Swift. "I don't see why
we can't shake them off."

"It's on account of this luminous water," explained Captain Weston.
"Once we are clear of that it will be easy, I think, to give them the
slip. That is, if we can get out of their sight long enough. Of course,
if they keep close after us, they can pick us up with their
searchlight, for I suppose they carry one."

"Yes," admitted the aged inventor, "they have as strong a one as we
have. In fact, their ship is second only to this one in speed and
power. I know, for Bentley & Eagert showed me some of the plans before
they started it, and asked my opinion. This was before I had the notion
of building a submarine. Yes, I am afraid we'll have trouble getting
away from them."

"I can't understand this phosphorescent glow keeping up so long,"
remarked Captain Weston. "I've seen it in this locality several times,
but it never covered such an extent of the ocean in my time.  There
must be changed conditions here now."

For an hour or more the race was kept up, and the two submarines forged
ahead through the glowing sea. The Wonder remained slightly above and
to the rear of the other, the better to keep sight of her, and though
the Advance was run to her limit of speed, her rival could not be
shaken off.  Clearly the Wonder was a speedy craft.

"It's too bad that we've got to fight them, as well as run the risk of
lots of other troubles which are always present when sailing under
water," observed Mr Damon, who wandered about the submarine like the
nervous person he was. "Bless my shirt-studs! Can't we blow them up, or
cripple them in some way? They have no right to go after our treasure."

"Well, I guess they've got as much right as we have," declared Tom. "It
goes to whoever reaches the wreck first.  But what I don't like is
their mean, sneaking way of doing it. If they went off on their own
hook and looked for it I wouldn't say a word. But they expect us to
lead them to the wreck, and then they'll rob us if they can. That's not
fair."

"Indeed, it isn't," agreed Captain Weston, "if I may be allowed the
expression. We ought to find some way of stopping them. But, if I'm not
mistaken," he added quickly, looking from one of the port bull's-eyes,
"the phosphorescent glow is lessening. I believe we are running beyond
that part of the ocean."

There was no doubt of it, the glow was growing less and less, and ten
minutes later the Advance was speeding along through a sea as black as
night. Then, to avoid running into some wreck, it was necessary to turn
on the searchlight.

"Are they still after us?" asked Mr. Swift of his son, as he emerged
from the engine-room, where he had gone to make some adjustments to the
machinery, with the hope of increasing the speed.

"I'll go look," volunteered the lad. He climbed up into the conning
tower again, and for a moment, as he gazed back into the black waters
swirling all about, he hoped that they had lost the Wonder. But a
moment later his heart sank as he caught sight, through the liquid
element, of the flickering gleams of another searchlight, the rays
undulating through the sea.

"Still following," murmured the young inventor. "They're not going to
give up. But we must make 'em--that's all."

He went down to report what he had seen, and a consultation was held.
Captain Weston carefully studied the charts of that part of the ocean,
and finding that there was a great depth of water at hand, proposed a
series of evolutions.

"We can go up and down, shoot first to one side and then to the other,"
he explained. "We can even drop down to the bottom and rest there for a
while. Perhaps, in that way, we can shake them off."

They tried it. The Advance was sent up until her conning tower was out
of the water, and then she was suddenly forced down until she was but a
few feet from the bottom. She darted to the left, to the right, and
even doubled and went back over the course she had taken. But all to no
purpose.  The Wonder proved fully as speedy, and those in her seemed to
know just how to handle the submarine, so that every evolution of the
Advance was duplicated. Her rival could not be shaken off.

All night this was kept up, and when morning came, though only the
clocks told it, for eternal night was below the surface, the rival
gold-seekers were still on the trail.

"They won't give up," declared Mr. Swift hopelessly.

"No, we've got to race them for it, just as Berg proposed," admitted
Tom. "But if they want a straightaway race we'll give it to 'em. Let's
run her to the limit, dad."

"That's what we've been doing, Tom."

"No, not exactly, for we've been submerged a little too much to get the
best speed out of our craft. Let's go a little nearer the surface, and
give them the best race they'll ever have."

Then the race began; and such a contest of speed as it was! With her
propellers working to the limit, and every volt of electricity that was
available forced into the forward and aft plates, the Advance surged
through the water, about ten feet below the surface. But the Wonder
kept after her, giving her knot for knot. The course of the leading
submarine was easy to trace now, in the morning light which penetrated
ten feet down.

"No use," remarked Tom again, when, after two hours, the Wonder was
still close behind them. "Our only chance is that they may have a
breakdown."

"Or run out of air, or something like that," added Captain Weston.
"They are crowding us pretty close. I had no idea they could keep up
this speed. If they don't look out," he went on as he looked from one
of the aft observation windows, "they'll foul us, and--"

His remarks were interrupted by a jar to the Advance. She seemed to
shiver and careened to one side. Then came another bump.

"Slow down!" cried the captain, rushing toward the pilot house.

"What's the matter?" asked Tom, as he threw the engines and electrical
machines out of gear. "Have we hit anything?"

"No. Something has hit us," cried the captain. "Their submarine has
rammed us."

"Rammed us!" repeated Mr. Swift. "Tom, run out the electric cannon!
They're trying to sink us! We'll have to fight them. Run out the stern
electric gun and we'll make them wish they'd not followed us."




Chapter Eighteen

The Electric Gun


There was much  excitement aboard the Advance. The submarine came to a
stop in the water, while the treasure-seekers waited anxiously for what
was to follow. Would they be rammed again? This time, stationary as
they were, and with the other boat coming swiftly on, a hole might be
stove through the Advance, in spite of her powerful sides.

They had not long to wait. Again there came a jar, and once more the
Swifts' boat careened. But the blow was a glancing one and,
fortunately, did little damage.

"They certainly must be trying to sink us," agreed Captain Weston.
"Come, Tom, we'll take a look from the stern and see what they're up
to."

"And get the stern electric gun ready to fire," repeated Mr. Swift. "We
must protect ourselves. Mr. Sharp and I will go to the bow. There is no
telling what they may do. They're desperate, and may ram us from in
front."

Tom and the captain hurried aft. Through the thick plate-glass windows
they could see the blunt nose of the Wonder not far away, the rival
submarine having come to a halt.  There she lay, black and silent, like
some monster fish waiting to devour its victim.

"There doesn't appear to be much damage done back here," observed Tom.
"No leaks. Guess they didn't puncture us."

"Perhaps it was due to an accident that they rammed us," suggested the
captain.

"Well, they wouldn't have done it if they hadn't followed us so close,"
was the opinion of the young inventor.  "They're taking too many
chances. We've got to stop 'em."

"What is this electric gun your father speaks of?"

"Why, it's a regular electric cannon. It fires a solid ball, weighing
about twenty-five pounds, but instead of powder, which would hardly do
under water, and instead of compressed air, which is used in the
torpedo tubes of the Government submarines, we use a current of
electricity. It forces the cannon ball out with great energy."

"I wonder what they will do next?" observed the captain, peering
through a bull's eye.

"We can soon tell," replied the youth. "We'll go ahead, and if they try
to follow I'm going to fire on them."

"Suppose you sink them?"

"I won't fire to do that; only to disable them. They brought it on
themselves. We can't risk having them damage us. Help me with the
cannon, will you please, captain?"

The electric cannon was a long, steel tube in the after part of the
submarine. It projected a slight distance from the sides of the ship,
and by an ingenious arrangement could be swung around in a ball and
socket joint, thus enabling it to shoot in almost any direction.

It was the work of but a few minutes to get it ready and, with the
muzzle pointing toward the Wonder, Tom adjusted the electric wires and
inserted the solid shot.

"Now we're prepared for them!" he cried. "I think a good plan will be
to start ahead, and if they try to follow to fire on them. They've
brought it on themselves."

"Correct," spoke Captain Weston.

Tom hurried forward to tell his father of this plan.

"We'll do it!" cried Mr. Swift. "Go ahead, Mr. Sharp, and we'll see if
those scoundrels will follow."

The young inventor returned on the run to the electric cannon. There
was a whir of machinery, and the Advance moved forward. She increased
her speed, and the two watchers in the stern looked anxiously out of
the windows to see what their rivals would do.

For a moment no movement was noticeable on the part of the Wonder.
Then, as those aboard her appeared to realize that the craft on which
they depended to pilot them to the sunken treasure was slipping away,
word was given to follow. The ship of Berg and his employers shot after
the Advance.

"Here they come!" cried Captain Weston. "They're going to ram us again!"

"Then I'm going to fire on them!" declared Tom savagely.

On came the Wonder, nearer and nearer. Her speed was rapidly
increasing. Suddenly she bumped the Advance, and then, as if it was an
unavoidable accident, the rear submarine sheered off to one side.

"They're certainly at it again!" cried Tom, and peering from the
bull's-eye he saw the Wonder shoot past the mouth of the electric
cannon. "Here it goes!" he added.

He shoved over the lever, making the proper connection.  There was no
corresponding report, for the cannon was noiseless, but there was a
slight jar as the projectile left the muzzle. The Wonder could be seen
to heel over.

"You hit her! You hit her!" cried Captain Weston. "A good shot!"

"I was afraid she was past me when I pulled the lever," explained Tom.
"She went like a flash."

"No, you caught her on the rudder," declared the captain.  "I think
you've put her out of business. Yes, they're rising to the surface."

The lad rapidly inserted another ball, and recharged the cannon. Then
he peered out into the water, illuminated by the light of day overhead,
as they were not far down. He could see the Wonder rising to the
surface. Clearly something had happened.

"Maybe they're going to drop down on us from above, and try to sink
us," suggested the youth, while he stood ready to fire again. "If they
do--"

His words were interrupted by a slight jar throughout the submarine.

"What was that?" cried the captain.

"Dad fired the bow gun at them, but I don't believe he hit them,"
answered the young inventor.

"I wonder what damage I did? Guess we'll go to the surface to find out."

Clearly the Wonder had given up the fight for the time being. In fact,
she had no weapon with which to respond to a fusillade from her rival.
Tom hastened forward and informed his father of what had happened.

"If her steering gear is out of order, we may have a chance to slip
away," said Mr. Swift "We'll go up and see what we can learn."

A few minutes later Tom, his father and Captain Weston stepped from the
conning tower, which was out of water, on to the little flat deck a
short distance away lay the Wonder, and on her deck was Berg and a
number of men, evidently members of the crew.

"Why did you fire on us?" shouted the agent angrily.

"Why did you follow us?" retorted Tom.

"Well, you've broken our rudder and disabled us," went on Berg, not
answering the question. "You'll suffer for this!  I'll have you
arrested."

"You only got what you deserved," added Mr. Swift. "You were acting
illegally, following us, and you tried to sink us by ramming my craft
before we retaliated by firing on you."

"It was an accident, ramming you," said Berg. "We couldn't help it. I
now demand that you help us make repairs."

"Well, you've got nerve!" cried Captain Weston, his eyes flashing. "I'd
like to have a personal interview with you for about ten minutes. Maybe
something besides your ship would need repairs then."

Berg turned away, scowling, but did not reply. He began directing the
crew what to do about the broken rudder.

"Come on," proposed Tom in a low voice, for sounds carry very easily
over water. "Let's go below and skip out while we have a chance. They
can't follow now, and we can get to the sunken treasure ahead of them."

"Good advice," commented his father. "Come, Captain Weston, we'll go
below and close the conning tower."

Five minutes later the Advance sank from sight, the last glimpse Tom
had of Berg and his men being a sight of them standing on the deck of
their floating boat, gazing in the direction of their successful rival.
The Wonder was left behind, while Tom and his friends were soon once
more speeding toward the treasure wreck.




Chapter Nineteen

Captured


"Down deep," advised Captain Weston, as he stood beside Tom and Mr.
Swift in the pilot house. "As far as you can manage her, and then
forward. We'll take no more chances with these fellows."

"The only trouble is," replied the young inventor, "that the deeper we
go the slower we have to travel. The water is so dense that it holds us
back."

"Well, there is no special need of hurrying now," went on the sailor.
"No one is following you, and two or three days difference in reaching
the wreck will not amount to anything."

"Unless they repair their rudder, and take after us again," suggested
Mr. Swift.

"They're not very likely to do that," was the captain's opinion. "It
was more by luck than good management that they picked us up before.
Now, having to delay, as they will, to repair their steering gear,
while we can go as deep as we please and speed ahead, it is practically
impossible for them to catch up to us. No, I think we have nothing to
fear from them."

But though danger from Berg and his crowd was somewhat remote, perils
of another sort were hovering around the treasure-seekers, and they
were soon to experience them.

It was much different from sailing along in the airship, Tom thought,
for there was no blue sky and fleecy clouds to see, and they could not
look down and observe, far below them, cities and villages. Nor could
they breathe the bracing atmosphere of the upper regions.

But if there was lack of the rarefied air of the clouds, there was no
lack of fresh atmosphere. The big tanks carried a large supply, and
whenever more was needed the oxygen machine would supply it.

As there was no need, however, of remaining under water for any great
stretch of time, it was their practice to rise every day and renew the
air supply, also to float along on the surface for a while, or speed
along, with only the conning tower out, in order to afford a view, and
to enable Captain Weston to take observations. But care was always
exercised to make sure no ships were in sight when emerging on the
surface, for the gold-seekers did not want to be hailed and questioned
by inquisitive persons.

It was about four days after the disabling of the rival submarine, and
the Advance was speeding along about a mile and a half under water. Tom
was in the pilot house with Captain Weston, Mr. Damon was at his
favorite pastime of looking out of the glass side windows into the
ocean and its wonders, and Mr. Swift and the balloonist were, as
usual, in the engine-room.

"How near do you calculate we are to the sunken wreck?" asked Tom of
his companion.

"Well, at the calculation we made yesterday, we are within about a
thousand miles of it now. We ought to reach it in about four more days,
if we don't have any accidents."

"And how deep do you think it is?" went on the lad.

"Well, I'm afraid it's pretty close to two miles, if not more. It's
quite a depth, and of course impossible for ordinary divers to reach.
But it will be possible in this submarine and in the strong diving
suits your father has invented for us to get to it. Yes, I don't
anticipate much trouble in getting out the gold, once we reach the
wreck of course--"

The captain's remark was not finished. From the engine-room there came
a startled shout:

"Tom! Tom! Your father is hurt! Come here, quick!"

"Take the wheel!" cried the lad to the captain. "I must go to my
father." It was Mr. Sharp's voice he had heard.

Racing to the engine-room, Tom saw his parent doubled up over a dynamo,
while to one side, his hand on a copper switch, stood Mr. Sharp.

"What's the matter?" shouted the lad.

"He's held there by a current of electricity," replied the balloonist.
"The wires are crossed."

"Why don't you shut off the current?" demanded the youth, as he
prepared to pull his parent from the whirring machine.  Then he
hesitated, for he feared he, too, would be glued fast by the terrible
current, and so be unable to help Mr. Swift.

"I'm held fast here, too," replied the balloonist. "I started to cut
out the current at this switch, but there's a short circuit somewhere,
and I can't let go, either. Quick, shut off all power at the main
switchboard forward."

Tom realized that this was the only thing to do. He ran forward and
with a yank cut out all the electric wires. With a sigh of relief Mr.
Sharp pulled his hands from the copper where he had been held fast as
if by some powerful magnet, his muscles cramped by the current.
Fortunately the electricity was of low voltage, and he was not burned.
The body of Mr. Swift toppled backward from the dynamo, as Tom sprang
to reach his father.

"He's dead!" he cried, as he saw the pale face and the closed eyes.

"No, only badly shocked, I hope," spoke Mr. Sharp. "But we must get him
to the fresh air at once. Start the tank pumps.  We'll rise to the
surface."

The youth needed no second bidding. Once more turning on the electric
current, he set the powerful pumps in motion and the submarine began to
rise. Then, aided by Captain Weston and Mr. Damon, the young inventor
carried his father to a couch in the main cabin. Mr. Sharp took charge
of the machinery.

Restoratives were applied, and there was a flutter of the eyelids of
the aged inventor.

"I think he'll come around all right," said the sailor kindly, as he
saw Tom's grief. "Fresh air will be the thing for him. We'll be on the
surface in a minute."

Up shot the Advance, while Mr. Sharp stood ready to open the conning
tower as soon as it should be out of water. Mr. Swift seemed to be
rapidly reviving. With a bound the submarine, forced upward from the
great depth, fairly shot out of the water. There was a clanking sound
as the aeronaut opened the airtight door of the tower, and a breath of
fresh air came in.

"Can you walk, dad, or shall we carry you?" asked Tom solicitously.

"Oh, I--I'm feeling better now," was the inventor's reply.  "I'll soon
be all right when I get out on deck. My foot slipped as I was adjusting
a wire that had gotten out of order, and I fell so that I received a
large part of the current. I'm glad I was not burned. Was Mr. Sharp
hurt? I saw him run to the switch, just before I lost consciousness."

"No, I'm all right," answered the balloonist. "But allow us to get you
out to the fresh air. You'll feel much better then."

Mr. Swift managed to walk slowly to the ladder leading to the conning
tower, and thence to the deck. The others followed him. As all emerged
from the submarine they uttered a cry of astonishment.

There, not one hundred yards away, was a great warship, flying a flag
which, in a moment, Tom recognized as that of Brazil. The cruiser was
lying off a small island, and all about were small boats, filled with
natives, who seemed to be bringing supplies from land to the ship. At
the unexpected sight of the submarine, bobbing up from the bottom of
the ocean, the natives uttered cries of fright.  The attention of those
on the warship was attracted, and the bridge and rails were lined with
curious officers and men.

"It's a good thing we didn't come up under that ship," observed Tom.
"They would have thought we were trying to torpedo her. Do you feel
better, dad?" he asked, his wonder over the sight of the big vessel
temporarily eclipsed in his anxiety for his parent.

"Oh, yes, much better. I'm all right now. But I wish we hadn't
disclosed ourselves to these people. They may demand to know where we
are going, and Brazil is too near Uruguay to make it safe to tell our
errand. They may guess it, however, from having read of the wreck, and
our departure."

"Oh, I guess it will be all right," replied Captain Weston. "We can
tell them we are on a pleasure trip. That's true enough. It would give
us great pleasure to find that gold."

"There's a boat, with some officers in it, to judge by the amount of
gold lace on them, putting off from the ship," remarked Mr. Sharp.

"Ha! Yes! Evidently they intend to pay us a formal visit," observed Mr.
Damon. "Bless my gaiters, though. I'm not dressed to receive company. I
think I'll put on my dress suit."

"It's too late," advised Tom. "They'll be here in a minute."

Urged on by the lusty arms of the Brazilian sailors, the boat,
containing several officers, neared the floating submarine rapidly.

"Ahoy there!" called an officer in the bow, his accent betraying his
unfamiliarity with the English language. "What craft are you?"

"Submarine, Advance, from New Jersey," replied Tom. "Who are you?"

"Brazilian cruiser San Paulo," was the reply. "Where are you bound?"
went on the officer.

"On pleasure," answered Captain Weston quickly. "But why do you ask? We
are an American ship, sailing under American colors. Is this Brazilian
territory?"

"This island is--yes," came back the answer, and by this time the small
boat was at the side of the submarine. Before the adventurers could
have protested, had they a desire to do so, there were a number of
officers and the crew of the San Paulo on the small deck.

With a flourish, the officer who had done the questioning drew his
sword. Waving it in the air with a dramatic gesture, he exclaimed:

"You're our prisoners! Resist and my men shall cut you down like dogs!
Seize them, men!"

The sailors sprang forward, each one stationing himself at the side of
one of our friends, and grasping an arm.

"What does this mean?" cried Captain Weston indignantly.  "If this is a
joke, you're carrying it too far. If you're in earnest, let me warn you
against interfering with Americans!"

"We know what we are doing," was the answer from the officer.

The sailor who had hold of Captain Weston endeavored to secure a
tighter grip. The captain turned suddenly, and seizing the man about
the waist, with an exercise of tremendous strength hurled him over his
head and into the sea, the man making a great splash.

"That's the way I'll treat any one else who dares lay a hand on me!"
shouted the captain, who was transformed from a mild-mannered
individual into an angry, modern giant. There was a gasp of
astonishment at his feat, as the ducked sailor crawled back into the
small boat. And he did not again venture on the deck of the submarine.

"Seize them, men!" cried the gold-laced officer again, and this time he
and his fellows, including the crew, crowded so closely around Tom and
his friends that they could do nothing. Even Captain Weston found it
impossible to offer any resistance, for three men grabbed hold of him
but his spirit was still a fighting one, and he struggled desperately
but uselessly.

"How dare you do this?" he cried.

"Yes," added Tom, "what right have you to interfere with us?"

"Every right," declared the gold-laced officer.

"You are in Brazilian territory, and I arrest you."

"What for?" demanded Mr. Sharp.

"Because your ship is an American submarine, and we have received word
that you intend to damage our shipping, and may try to torpedo our
warships. I believe you tried to disable us a little while ago, but
failed. We consider that an act of war and you will be treated
accordingly. Take them on board the San Paulo," the officer went on,
turning to his aides. "We'll try them by court-marital here. Some of
you remain and guard this submarine. We will teach these filibustering
Americans a lesson."




Chapter Twenty

Doomed to Death


There was no room on the small deck of the submarine to make a stand
against the officers and crew of the Brazilian warship. In fact, the
capture of the gold-seekers had been effected so suddenly that their
astonishment almost deprived them of the power to think clearly.

At another command from the officer, who was addressed as Admiral
Fanchetti, several of the sailors began to lead Tom and his friends
toward the small boat.

"Do you feel all right, father?" inquired the lad anxiously, as he
looked at his parent. "These scoundrels have no right to treat us so."

"Yes, Tom, I'm all right as far as the electric shock is concerned, but
I don't like to be handled in this fashion."

"We ought not to submit!" burst out Mr. Damon. "Bless the stars and
stripes! We ought to fight."

"There's no chance," said Mr. Sharp. "We are right under the guns of
the ship. They could sink us with one shot. I guess we'll have to give
in for the time being."

"It is most unpleasant, if I may be allowed the expression," commented
Captain Weston mildly. He seemed to have lost his sudden anger, but
there was a steely glint in his eyes, and a grim, set look around his
month that showed his temper was kept under control only by an effort.
It boded no good to the sailors who had hold of the doughty captain if
he should once get loose, and it was noticed that they were on their
guard.

As for Tom, he submitted quietly to the two Brazilians who had hold of
either arm, and Mr. Swift was held by only one, for it was seen that he
was feeble.

"Into the boat with them!" cried Admiral Fanchetti. "And guard them
well, Lieutenant Drascalo, for I heard them plotting to escape," and
the admiral signaled to a younger officer, who was in charge of the men
guarding the prisoners.

"Lieutenant Drascalo, eh?" murmured Mr. Damon. "I think they made a
mistake naming him. It ought to be Rascalo. He looks like a rascal."

"Silenceo!" exclaimed the lieutenant, scowling at the odd character.

"Bless my spark plug! He's a regular fire-eater!" went on Mr. Damon,
who appeared to have fully recovered his spirits.

"Silenceo!" cried the lieutenant, scowling again, but Mr. Damon did not
appear to mind.

Admiral Fanchetti and several others of the gold-laced officers
remained aboard the submarine, while Tom and his friends were hustled
into the small boat and rowed toward the warship.

"I hope they don't damage our craft," murmured the young inventor, as
he saw the admiral enter the conning tower.

"If they do, we'll complain to the United States consul and demand
damages," said Mr. Swift.

"I'm afraid we won't have a chance to communicate with the consul,"
remarked Captain Weston.

"What do you mean?" asked Mr. Damon. "Bless my shoelaces, but will
these scoundrels--"

"Silenceo!" cried Lieutenant Drascalo quickly. "Dogs of Americans, do
you wish to insult us?"

"Impossible; you wouldn't appreciate a good, genuine United States
insult," murmured Tom under his breath.

"What I mean," went on the captain, "is that these people may carry the
proceedings off with a high hand. You heard the admiral speak of a
court-martial."

"Would they dare do that?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"They would dare anything in this part of the world, I'm afraid,"
resumed Captain Weston. "I think I see their plan, though. This admiral
is newly in command; his uniform shows that. He wants to make a name for
himself, and he seizes on our submarine as an excuse. He can send word
to his government that he destroyed a torpedo craft that sought to
wreck his ship. Thus he will acquire a reputation."

"But would his government support him in such a hostile act against the
United States, a friendly nation?" asked Tom.

"Oh, he would not claim to have acted against the United States as a
power. He would say that it was a private submarine, and, as a matter
of fact, it is. While we are under the protection of the stars and
stripes, our vessel is not a Government one," and Captain Weston spoke
the last in a low voice, so the scowling lieutenant could not hear.

"What will they do with us?" inquired Mr. Swift.

"Have some sort of a court-martial, perhaps," went on the captain, "and
confiscate our craft. Then they will send us back home, I expect for
they would not dare harm us."

"But take our submarine!" cried Tom. "The villains--"

"Silenceo!" shouted Lieutenant Drascalo and he drew his sword.

By this time the small boat was under the big guns of the San Paulo,
and the prisoners were ordered, in broken English, to mount a companion
ladder that hung over the side. In a short time they were on deck, amid
a crowd of sailors, and they could see the boat going back to bring off
the admiral, who signaled from the submarine. Tom and his friends were
taken below to a room that looked like a prison, and there, a little
later, they were visited by Admiral Fanchetti and several officers.

"You will be tried at once," said the admiral. "I have examined your
submarine and I find she carries two torpedo tubes. It is a wonder you
did not sink me at once."

"Those are not torpedo tubes!" cried Tom, unable to keep silent, though
Captain Weston motioned him to do so.

"I know torpedo tubes when I see them," declared the admiral. "I
consider I had a very narrow escape. Your country is fortunate that
mine does not declare war against it for this act. But I take it you
are acting privately, for you fly no flag, though you claim to be from
the United States."

"There's no place for a flag on the submarine," went on Tom. "What good
would it be under water?"

"Silenceo!" cried Lieutenant Drascalo, the admonition to silence
seeming to be the only command of which he was capable.

"I shall confiscate your craft for my government," went on the admiral,
"and shall punish you as the court-martial may direct. You will be
tried at once."

It was in vain for the prisoners to protest. Matters were carried with
a high hand. They were allowed a spokesman, and Captain Weston, who
understood Spanish, was selected, that language being used. But the
defense was a farce, for he was scarcely listened to. Several officers
testified before the admiral, who was judge, that they had seen the
submarine rise out of the water, almost under the prow of the San
Paulo. It was assumed that the Advance had tried to wreck the warship,
but had failed. It was in vain that Captain Weston and the others told
of the reason for their rapid ascent from the ocean depths--that Mr.
Swift had been shocked, and needed fresh air. Their story was not
believed.

"We have heard enough!" suddenly exclaimed the admiral.  "The evidence
against you is over-whelming--er--what you Americans call conclusive,"
and he was speaking then in broken English. "I find you guilty, and the
sentence of this court-martial is that you be shot at sunrise, three
days hence!"

"Shot!" cried Captain Weston, staggering back at this unexpected
sentence. His companions turned white, and Mr. Swift leaned against his
son for support.

"Bless my stars! Of all the scoundrelly!" began Mr. Damon.

"Silenceo!" shouted the lieutenant, waving his sword.

"You will be shot," proceeded the admiral. "Is not that the verdict of
the honorable court?" he asked, looking at his fellow officers. They
all nodded gravely.

"But look here!" objected Captain Weston. "You don't dare do that! We
are citizens of the United States, and--"

"I consider you no better than pirates," interrupted the admiral. "You
have an armed submarine--a submarine with torpedo tubes. You invade our
harbor with it, and come up almost under my ship. You have forfeited
your right to the protection of your country, and I have no fear on
that score. You will be shot within three days. That is all.  Remove
the prisoners."

Protests were in vain, and it was equally useless to struggle. The
prisoners were taken out on deck, for which they were thankful, for the
interior of the ship was close and hot, the weather being intensely
disagreeable. They were told to keep within a certain space on deck,
and a guard of sailors, all armed, was placed near them. From where
they were they could see their submarine floating on the surface of the
little bay, with several Brazilians on the small deck. The Advance had
been anchored, and was surrounded by a flotilla of the native boats,
the brown-skinned paddlers gazing curiously at the odd craft.

"Well, this is tough luck!" murmured Tom. "How do you feel, dad?"

"As well as can be expected under the circumstances," was the reply.
"What do you think about this, Captain Weston?"

"Not very much, if I may be allowed the expression," was the answer.

"Do you think they will dare carry out that threat?" asked Mr. Sharp.

The captain shrugged his shoulders. "I hope it is only a bluff," he
replied, "made to scare us so we will consent to giving up the
submarine, which they have no right to confiscate. But these fellows
look ugly enough for anything," he went on.

"Then if there's any chance of them attempting to carry it out," spoke
Tom, "we've got to do something."

"Bless my gizzard, of course!" exclaimed Mr. Damon. "But what? That's
the question. To be shot! Why, that's a terrible threat! The villains--"

"Silenceo!" shouted Lieutenant Drascalo, coming up at that moment.




Chapter Twenty-One

The Escape


Events had happened so quickly that day that the gold-hunters could
scarcely comprehend them. It seemed only a short time since Mr. Swift
had been discovered lying disabled on the dynamo, and what had
transpired since seemed to have taken place in a few minutes, though it
was, in reality, several hours. This was made manifest by the feeling
of hunger on the part of Tom and his friends.

"I wonder if they're going to starve us, the scoundrels?" asked Mr.
Sharp, when the irate lieutenant was beyond hearing. "It's not fair to
make us go hungry and shoot us in the bargain."

"That's so, they ought to feed us," put in Tom. As yet neither he nor
the others fully realized the meaning of the sentence passed on them.

From where they were on deck they could look off to the little island.
From it boats manned by natives were constantly putting off, bringing
supplies to the ship. The place appeared to be a sort of calling
station for Brazilian warships, where they could get fresh water and
fruit and other food.

From the island the gaze of the adventurers wandered to the submarine,
which lay not far away. They were chagrined to see several of the
bolder natives clambering over the deck.

"I hope they keep out of the interior," commented Tom. "If they get to
pulling or hauling on the levers and wheels they may open the tanks and
sink her, with the Conning tower open."

"Better that, perhaps, than to have her fall into the hands of a
foreign power," commented Captain Weston.  "Besides, I don't see that
it's going to matter much to us what becomes of her after we're--"

He did not finish, but every one knew what he meant, and a grim silence
fell upon the little group.

There came a welcome diversion, however, in the shape of three sailors,
bearing trays of food, which were placed on the deck in front of the
prisoners, who were sitting or lying in the shade of an awning, for the
sun was very hot.

"Ha! Bless my napkin-ring!" cried Mr. Damon with something of his
former gaiety. "Here's a meal, at all events. They don't intend to
starve us. Eat hearty, every one."

"Yes, we need to keep up our strength," observed Captain Weston.

"Why?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"Because we're going to try to escape!" exclaimed Tom in a low voice,
when the sailors who had brought the food had gone. "Isn't that what
you mean, captain?"

"Exactly. We'll try to give these villains the slip, and we'll need all
our strength and wits to do it. We'll wait until night, and see what we
can do."

"But where will we escape to?" asked Mr. Swift. "The island will afford
no shelter, and--"

"No, but our submarine will," went on the sailor.

"It's in the possession of the Brazilians," objected Tom.

"Once I get aboard the Advance twenty of those brown-skinned villains
won't keep me prisoner," declared Captain Weston fiercely. "If we can
only slip away from here, get into the small boat, or even swim to the
submarine, I'll make those chaps on board her think a hurricane has
broken loose."

"Yes, and I'll help," said Mr. Damon.

"And I," added Tom and the balloonist.

"That's the way to talk," commented the captain. "Now let's eat, for I
see that rascally lieutenant coming this way, and we mustn't appear to
be plotting, or he'll be suspicious."

The day passed slowly, and though the prisoners seemed to be allowed
considerable liberty, they soon found that it was only apparent. Once
Tom walked some distance from that portion of the deck where he and the
others had been told to remain. A sailor with a gun at once ordered him
back. Nor could they approach the rails without being directed, harshly
enough at times, to move back amidships.

As night approached the gold-seekers were on the alert for any chance
that might offer to slip away, or even attack their guard, but the
number of Brazilians around them was doubled in the evening, and after
supper, which was served to them on deck by the light of swinging
lanterns, they were taken below and locked in a stuffy cabin. They
looked helplessly at each other.

"Don't give up," advised Captain Weston. "It's a long night. We may be
able to get out of here."

But this hope was in vain. Several times he and Tom, thinking the
guards outside the cabin were asleep, tried to force the lock of the
door with their pocket-knives, which had not been taken from them. But
one of the sailors was aroused each time by the noise, and looked in
through a barred window, so they had to give it up. Slowly the night
passed, and morning found the prisoners pale, tired and discouraged.
They were brought up on deck again, for which they were thankful, as in
that tropical climate it was stifling below.

During the day they saw Admiral Fanchetti and several of his officers
pay a visit to the submarine. They went below through the opened
conning tower, and were gone some time.

"I hope they don't disturb any of the machinery," remarked Mr. Swift.
"That could easily do great damage."

Admiral Fanchetti seemed much pleased with himself when he returned
from his visit to the submarine.

"You have a fine craft," he said to the prisoners. "Or, rather, you had
one. My government now owns it. It seems a pity to shoot such good boat
builders, but you are too dangerous to be allowed to go."

If there had been any doubt in the minds of Tom and his friends that
the sentence of the court-martial was only for effect, it was dispelled
that day. A firing squad was told off in plain view of them, and the
men were put through their evolutions by Lieutenant Drascalo, who had
them load, aim and fire blank cartridges at an imaginary line of
prisoners. Tom could not repress a shudder as he noted the leveled
rifles, and saw the fire and smoke spurt from the muzzles.

"Thus we shall do to you at sunrise to-morrow," said the lieutenant,
grinning, as he once more had his men practice their grim work.

It seemed hotter than ever that day. The sun was fairly broiling, and
there was a curious haziness and stillness to the air. It was noticed
that the sailors on the San Paulo were busy making fast all loose
articles on deck with extra lashings, and hatch coverings were doubly
secured.

"What do you suppose they are up to?" asked Tom of Captain Weston.

"I think it is coming on to blow," he replied, "and they don't want to
be caught napping. They have fearful storms down in this region at this
season of the year, and I think one is about due."

"I hope it doesn't wreck the submarine," spoke Mr. Swift.  "They ought
to close the hatch of the conning tower, for it won't take much of a
sea to make her ship considerable water."

Admiral Fanchetti had thought of this, however, and as the afternoon
wore away and the storm signs multiplied, he sent word to close the
submarine. He left a few sailors aboard inside on guard.

"It's too hot to eat," observed Tom, when their supper had been brought
to them, and the others felt the same way about it. They managed to
drink some cocoanut milk, prepared in a palatable fashion by the
natives of the island, and then, much to their disgust, they were taken
below again and locked in the cabin.

"Whew! But it certainly is hot!" exclaimed Mr. Damon as he sat down on
a couch and fanned himself. "This is awful!"

"Yes, something is going to happen pretty soon," observed Captain
Weston. "The storm will break shortly, I think."

They sat languidly about the cabin. It was so oppressive that even the
thought of the doom that awaited them in the morning could hardly seem
worse than the terrible heat. They could hear movements going on about
the ship, movements which indicated that preparations were being made
for something unusual. There was a rattling of a chain through a hawse
hole, and Captain Weston remarked:

"They're putting down another anchor. Admiral Fanchetti had better get
away from the island, though, unless he wants to be wrecked. He'll be
blown ashore in less than no time. No cable or chain will hold in such
storms as they have here."

There came a period of silence, which was suddenly broken by a howl as
of some wild beast.

"What's that?" cried Tom, springing up from where he was stretched out
on the cabin floor.

"Only the wind," replied the captain. "The storm has arrived."

The howling kept up, and soon the ship began to rock. The wind
increased, and a little later there could be heard, through an opened
port in the prisoners' cabin, the dash of rain.

"It's a regular hurricane!" exclaimed the captain. "I wonder if the
cables will hold?"

"What about the submarine?" asked Mr. Swift anxiously.

"I haven't much fear for her. She lies so low in the water that the
wind can't get much hold on her. I don't believe she'll drag her
anchor."

Once more came a fierce burst of wind, and a dash of rain, and then,
suddenly above the outburst of the elements, there sounded a crash on
deck. It was followed by excited cries.

"Something's happened!" yelled Tom. The prisoners gathered in a
frightened group in the middle of the cabin. The cries were repeated,
and then came a rush of feet just outside the cabin door.

"Our guards! They're leaving!" shouted Tom.

"Right!" exclaimed Captain Weston. "Now's our chance! Come on! If we're
going to escape we must do it while the storm is at its height, and all
is in confusion. Come on!"

Tom tried the door. It was locked.

"One side!" shouted the captain, and this time he did not pause to say
"by your leave." He came at the portal on the run, and his shoulder
struck it squarely. There was a splintering and crashing of wood, and
the door was burst open.

"Follow me!" cried the valiant sailor, and Tom and the others rushed
after him. They could hear the wind howling more loudly than ever, and
as they reached the deck the rain dashed into their faces with such
violence that they could hardly see. But they were aware that something
had occurred.  By the light of several lanterns swaying in the terrific
blast they saw that one of the auxiliary masts had broken off near the
deck.

It had fallen against the chart house, smashing it, and a number of
sailors were laboring to clear away the wreckage.

"Fortune favors us!" cried Captain Weston. "Come on! Make for the small
boat. It's near the side ladder. We'll lower the boat and pull to the
submarine."

There came a flash of lightning, and in its glare Tom saw something
that caused him to cry out.

"Look!" he shouted. "The submarine. She's dragged her anchors!"

The Advance was much closer to the warship than she had been that
afternoon. Captain Weston looked over the side.

"It's the San Paulo that's dragging her anchors, not the submarine!" he
shouted. "We're bearing down on her! We must act quickly. Come on,
we'll lower the boat!"

In the rush of wind and the dash of rain the prisoners crowded to the
accommodation companion ladder, which was still over the side of the
big ship. No one seemed to be noticing them, for Admiral Fanchetti was
on the bridge, yelling orders for the clearing away of the wreckage.
But Lieutenant Drascalo, coming up from below at that moment, caught
sight of the fleeing ones. Drawing his sword, he rushed at them,
shouting:

"The prisoners! The prisoners! They are escaping!"

Captain Weston leaped toward the lieutenant.

"Look out for his sword!" cried Tom. But the doughty sailor did not
fear the weapon. Catching up a coil of rope, he cast it at the
lieutenant. It struck him in the chest, and he staggered back, lowering
his sword.

Captain Weston leaped forward, and with a terrific blow sent Lieutenant
Drascalo to the deck.

"There!" cried the sailor. "I guess you won't yell 'Silenceo!' for a
while now."

There was a rush of Brazilians toward the group of prisoners. Tom
caught one with a blow on the chin, and felled him, while Captain
Weston disposed of two more, and Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon one each. The
savage fighting of the Americans was too much for the foreigners, and
they drew back.

"Come on!" cried Captain Weston again. "The storm is getting worse. The
warship will crash into the submarine in a few minutes. Her anchors
aren't holding. I didn't think they would."

He made a dash for the ladder, and a glance showed him that the small
boat was in the water at the foot of it. The craft had not been hoisted
on the davits.

"Luck's with us at last!" cried Tom, seeing it also.  "Shall I help
you, dad?"

"No; I think I'm all right. Go ahead."

There came such a gust of wind that the San Paulo was heeled over, and
the wreck of the mast, rolling about, crashed into the side of a deck
house, splintering it. A crowd of sailors, led by Admiral Fanchetti,
who were again rushing on the escaping prisoners, had to leap back out
of the way of the rolling mast.

"Catch them! Don't let them get away!" begged the commander, but the
sailors evidently had no desire to close in with the Americans.

Through the rush of wind and rain Tom and his friends staggered down
the ladder. It was hard work to maintain one's footing, but they
managed it. On account of the high side of the ship the water was
comparatively calm under her lee, and, though the small boat was
bobbing about, they got aboard. The oars were in place, and in another
moment they had shoved off from the landing stage which formed the foot
of the accommodation ladder.

"Now for the Advance!" murmured Captain Weston.

"Come back! Come back, dogs of Americans!" cried a voice at the rail
over their heads, and looking up, Tom saw Lieutenant Drascalo. He had
snatched a carbine from a marine, and was pointing it at the recent
prisoners. He fired, the flash of the gun and a dazzling chain of
lightning coming together. The thunder swallowed up the report of the
carbine, but the bullet whistled uncomfortable close to Tom's head. The
blackness that followed the lightning shut out the view of everything
for a few seconds, and when the next flash came the adventurers saw
that they were close to their submarine.

A fusillade of shots sounded from the deck of the warship, but as the
marines were poor marksmen at best, and as the swaying of the ship
disconcerted them, our friends were in little danger.

There was quite a sea once they were beyond the protection of the side
of the warship, but Captain Weston, who was rowing, knew how to manage
a boat skillfully, and he soon had the craft alongside the bobbing
submarine.

"Get aboard, now, quick!" he cried.

They leaped to the small deck, casting the rowboat adrift.  It was the
work of but a moment to open the conning tower.  As they started to
descend they were met by several Brazilians coming up.

"Overboard with 'em!" yelled the captain. "Let them swim ashore or to
their ship!"

With almost superhuman strength he tossed one big sailor from the small
deck. Another showed fight, but he went to join his companion in the
swirling water. A man rushed at Tom, seeking the while to draw his
sword, but the young inventor, with a neat left-hander, sent him to
join the other two, and the remainder did not wait to try conclusions.
They leaped for their lives, and soon all could be seen, in the
frequent lightning flashes, swimming toward the warship which was now
closer than ever to the submarine.

"Get inside and we'll sink below the surface!" called Tom.  "Then we
don't care what happens."

They closed the steel door of the conning tower. As they did so they
heard the patter of bullets from carbines fired from the San Paulo.
Then came a violent tossing of the Advance; the waves were becoming
higher as they caught the full force of the hurricane. It took but an
instant to sever, from within, the cable attached to the anchor, which
was one belonging to the warship. The Advance began drifting.

"Open the tanks, Mr. Sharp!" cried Tom. "Captain Weston and I will
steer. Once below we'll start the engines."

Amid a crash of thunder and dazzling flashes of lightning, the
submarine began to sink. Tom, in the conning tower had a sight of the
San Paulo as it drifted nearer and nearer under the influence of the
mighty wind. As one bright flash came he saw Admiral Fanchetti and
Lieutenant Drascalo leaning over the rail and gazing at the Advance.

A moment later the view faded from sight as the submarine sank below
the surface of the troubled sea. She was tossed about for some time
until deep enough to escape the surface motion. Waiting until she was
far enough down so that her lights would not offer a mark for the guns
of the warship, the electrics were switched on.

"We're safe now!" cried Tom, helping his father to his cabin. "They've
got too much to attend to themselves to follow us now, even if they
could. Shall we go ahead, Captain Weston?"

"I think so, yes, if I may be allowed to express my opinion," was the
mild reply, in strange contrast to the strenuous work in which the
captain had just been engaged.

Tom signaled to Mr. Sharp in the engine-room, and in a few seconds the
Advance was speeding away from the island and the hostile vessel. Nor,
deep as she was now, was there any sign of the hurricane. In the
peaceful depths she was once more speeding toward the sunken treasure.




Chapter Twenty-Two

At the Wreck


"Well," remarked Mr. Damon, as the submarine hurled herself forward
through the ocean, "I guess that firing party will have something else
to do to-morrow morning besides aiming those rifles at us."

"Yes, indeed," agreed Tom. "They'll be lucky if they save their ship.
My, how that wind did blow!"

"You're right," put in Captain Weston. "When they get a hurricane down
in this region it's no cat's paw. But they were a mighty careless lot
of sailors. The idea of leaving the ladder over the side, and the boat
in the water."

"It was a good thing for us, though," was Tom's opinion.

"Indeed it was," came from the captain. "But as long as we are safe now
I think we'd better take a look about the craft to see if those chaps
did any damage. They can't have done much, though, or she wouldn't be
running so smoothly.  Suppose you go take a look, Tom, and ask your
father and Mr. Sharp what they think. I'll steer for a while, until we
get well away from the island."

The young inventor found his father and the balloonist busy in the
engine-room. Mr. Swift had already begun an inspection of the
machinery, and so far found that it had not been injured. A further
inspection showed that no damage had been done by the foreign guard
that had been in temporary possession of the Advance, though the
sailors had made free in the cabins, and had broken into the food
lockers, helping themselves plentifully. But there was still enough for
the gold-seekers.

"You'd never know there was a storm raging up above," observed Tom as
he rejoined Captain Weston in the lower pilot house, where he was
managing the craft. "It's as still and peaceful here as one could wish."

"Yes, the extreme depths are seldom disturbed by a surface storm. But
we are over a mile deep now. I sent her down a little while you were
gone, as I think she rides a little more steadily."

All that night they speeded forward, and the next day, rising to the
surface to take an observation, they found no traces of the storm,
which had blown itself out. They were several hundred miles away from
the hostile warship, and there was not a vessel in sight on the broad
expanse of blue ocean.

The air tanks were refilled, and after sailing along on the surface for
an hour or two, the submarine was again sent below, as Captain Weston
sighted through his telescope the smoke of a distant steamer.

"As long as it isn't the Wonder, we're all right," said Tom. "Still, we
don't want to answer a lot of questions about ourselves and our object."

"No. I fancy the Wonder will give up the search," remarked the captain,
as the Advance was sinking to the depths.

"We must be getting pretty near to the end of our search ourselves,"
ventured the young inventor.

"We are within five hundred miles of the intersection of the
forty-fifth parallel and the twenty-seventh meridian, east from
Washington," said the captain. "That's as near as I could locate the
wreck. Once we reach that point we will have to search about under
water, for I don't fancy the other divers left any buoys to mark the
spot."

It was two days later, after uneventful sailing, partly on the surface,
and partly submerged, that Captain Weston, taking a noon observation,
announced:

"Well, we're here!"

"Do you mean at the wreck?" asked Mr. Swift eagerly.

"We're at the place where she is supposed to lie, in about two miles of
water," replied the captain. "We are quite a distance off the coast of
Uruguay, about opposite the harbor of Rio de La Plata. From now on we
shall have to nose about under water, and trust to luck."

With her air tanks filled to their capacity, and Tom having seen that
the oxygen machine and other apparatus was in perfect working order,
the submarine was sent below on her search. Though they were in the
neighborhood of the wreck, the adventurers might still have to do
considerable searching before locating it. Lower and lower they sank
into the depths of the sea, down and down, until they were deeper than
they had ever gone before. The pressure was tremendous, but the steel
sides of the Advance withstood it.

Then began a search that lasted nearly a week. Back and forth they
cruised, around in great circles, with the powerful searchlight focused
to disclose the sunken treasure ship. Once Tom, who was observing the
path of light in the depths from the conning tower, thought he had seen
the remains of the Boldero, for a misty shape loomed up in front of the
submarine, and he signaled for a quick stop. It was a wreck, but it had
been on the ocean bed for a score of years, and only a few timbers
remained of what had been a great ship. Much disappointed, Tom rang for
full speed ahead again, and the current was sent into the great
electric plates that pulled and pushed the submarine forward.

For two days more nothing happened. They searched around under the
green waters, on the alert for the first sign, but they saw nothing.
Great fish swam about them, sometimes racing with the Advance. The
adventurers beheld great ocean caverns, and skirted immense rocks,
where dwelt monsters of the deep. Once a great octopus tried to do
battle with the submarine and crush it in its snaky arms, but Tom saw
the great white body, with saucer-shaped eyes, in the path of light and
rammed him with the steel point. The creature died after a struggle.

They were beginning to despair when a full week had passed and they
were seemingly as far from the wreck as ever. They went to the surface
to enable Captain Weston to take another observation. It only confirmed
the other, and showed that they were in the right vicinity. But it was
like looking for a needle in a haystack, almost, to find the sunken ship
in that depth of water.

"Well, we'll try again," said Mr. Swift, as they sank once more beneath
the surface.

It was toward evening, on the second day after this, that Tom, who was
on duty in the conning tower, saw a black shape looming up in front of
the submarine, the searchlight revealing it to him far enough away so
that he could steer to avoid it. He thought at first that it was a
great rock, for they were moving along near the bottom, but the
peculiar shape of it soon convinced him that this could not be. It came
more plainly into view as the submarine approached it more slowly, then
suddenly, out of the depths in the illumination from the searchlight,
the young inventor saw the steel sides of a steamer. His heart gave a
great thump, but he would not call out yet, fearing that it might be
some other vessel than the one containing the treasure.

He steered the Advance so as to circle it. As he swept past the bows he
saw in big letters near the sharp prow the word, Boldero.

"The wreck! The wreck!" he cried, his voice ringing through the craft
from end to end. "We've found the wreck at last!"

"Are you sure?" cried his father, hurrying to his son, Captain Weston
following.

"Positive," answered the lad. The submarine was slowing up now, and Tom
sent her around on the other side. They had a good view of the sunken
ship. It seemed to be intact, no gaping holes in her sides, for only
her plates had started, allowing her to sink gradually.

"At last," murmured Mr. Swift. "Can it be possible we are about to get
the treasure?"

"That's the Boldero, all right," affirmed Captain Weston.  "I recognize
her, even if the name wasn't on her bow. Go right down on the bottom,
Tom, and we'll get out the diving suits and make an examination."

The submarine settled to the ocean bed. Tom glanced at the depth gage.
It showed over two miles and a half. Would they be able to venture out
into water of such enormous pressure in the comparatively frail diving
suits, and wrest the gold from the wreck? It was a serious question.

The Advance came to a stop. In front of her loomed the great bulk of
the Boldero, vague and shadowy in the flickering gleam of the
searchlight. As the gold-seekers looked at her through the bull's-eyes
of the conning tower, several great forms emerged from beneath the
wreck's bows.

"Deep-water sharks!" exclaimed  Captain Weston, "and monsters, too. But
they can't bother us. Now to get out the gold!"




Chapter Twenty-Three

Attacked by Sharks


For a few minutes after reaching the wreck, which had so occupied their
thoughts for the past weeks, the adventurers did nothing but gaze at it
from the ports of the submarine.  The appearance of the deep-water
sharks gave them no concern, for they did not imagine the ugly
creatures would attack them. The treasure-seekers were more engrossed
with the problem of getting out the gold.

"How are we going to get at it?" asked Tom, as he looked at the high
sides of the sunken ship, which towered well above the comparatively
small Advance.

"Why, just go in and get it," suggested Mr. Damon. "Where is gold in a
cargo usually kept, Captain Weston? You ought to know, I should think.
Bless my pocketbook!"

"Well, I should say that in this case the bullion would be kept in a
safe in the captain's cabin," replied the sailor.  "Or, if not there,
in some after part of the vessel, away from where the crew is
quartered. But it is going to be quite a problem to get at it. We can't
climb the sides of the wreck, and it will be impossible to lower her
ladder over the side. However, I think we had better get into the
diving suits and take a closer look. We can walk around her."

"That's my idea," put in Mr. Sharp. "But who will go, and who will stay
with the ship?"

"I think Tom and Captain Weston had better go," suggested Mr. Swift.
"Then, in case anything happens, Mr. Sharp, you and I will be on board
to manage matters."

"You don't think anything will happen, do you, dad?" asked his son with
a laugh, but it was not an easy one, for the lad was thinking of the
shadowy forms of the ugly sharks.

"Oh, no, but it's best to be prepared," answered his father.

The captain and the young inventor lost no time in donning the diving
suits. They each took a heavy metal bar, pointed at one end, to use in
assisting them to walk on the bed of the ocean, and as a protection in
case the sharks might attack them. Entering the diving chamber, they
were shut in, and then water was admitted until the pressure was seen,
by gauges, to be the same as that outside the submarine. Then the
sliding steel door was opened. At first Tom and the captain could
barely move, so great was the pressure of water on their bodies. They
would have been crushed but for the protection afforded by the strong
diving suits.

In a few minutes they became used to it, and stepped out on the floor
of the ocean. They could not, of course, speak to each other, but Tom
looked through the glass eyes of his helmet at the captain, and the
latter motioned for the lad to follow. The two divers could breathe
perfectly, and by means of small, but powerful lights on the helmets,
the way was lighted for them as they advanced.

Slowly they approached the wreck, and began a circuit of her. They
could see several places where the pressure of the water, and the
strain of the storm in which she had foundered, had opened the plates
of the ship, but in no case were the openings large enough to admit a
person.  Captain Weston put his steel bar in one crack, and tried to
pry it farther open, but his strength was not equal to the task. He
made some peculiar motions, but Tom could not understand them.

They looked for some means by which they could mount to the decks of
the Boldero, but none was visible. It was like trying to scale a
fifty-foot smooth steel wall. There was no place for a foothold. Again
the sailor made some peculiar motions, and the lad puzzled over them.
They had gone nearly around the wreck now, and as yet had seen no way
in which to get at the gold. As they passed around the bow, which was
in a deep shadow from a great rock, they caught sight of the submarine
lying a short distance away. Light streamed from many bull's-eyes, and
Tom felt a sense of security as he looked at her, for it was lonesome
enough in that great depth of water, unable to speak to his companion,
who was a few feet in advance.

Suddenly there was a swirling of the water, and Tom was nearly thrown
off his feet by the rush of some great body. A long, black shadow
passed over his head, and an instant later he saw the form of a great
shark launched at Captain Weston. The lad involuntarily cried in alarm,
but the result was surprising. He was nearly deafened by his own voice,
confined as the sound was in the helmet he wore. But the sailor, too,
had felt the movement of the water, and turned just in time. He thrust
upward with his pointed bar. But he missed the stroke, and Tom, a
moment later, saw the great fish turn over so that its mouth, which is
far underneath its snout, could take in the queer shape which the shark
evidently thought was a choice morsel. The big fish did actually get
the helmet of Captain Weston inside its jaws, but probably it would
have found it impossible to crush the strong steel. Still it might have
sprung the joints, and water would have entered, which would have been
as fatal as though the sailor had been swallowed by the shark. Tom
realized this and, moving as fast as he could through the water, he
came up behind the monster and drove his steel bar deep into it.

The sea was crimsoned with blood, and the savage creature, opening its
mouth, let go of the captain. It turned on Tom, who again harpooned it.
Then the fish darted off and began a wild flurry, for it was dying. The
rush of water nearly threw Tom off his feet, but he managed to make his
way over to his friend, and assist him to rise. A confident look from
the sailor showed the lad that Captain Weston was uninjured, though he
must have been frightened. As the two turned to make their way back to
the submarine, the waters about them seemed alive with the horrible
monsters.

It needed but a glance to show what they were, Sharks!  Scores of them,
long, black ones, with their ugly, undershot mouths. They had been
attracted by the blood of the one Tom had killed, but there was not a
meal for all of them off the dying creature, and the great fish might
turn on the young inventor and his companion.

The two shrank closer toward the wreck. They might get under the prow
of that and be safe. But even as they started to move, several of the
sea wolves darted quickly at them.  Tom glanced at the captain. What
could they do? Strong as were the diving suits, a combined attack by
the sharks, with their powerful jaws, would do untold damage.

At that moment there seemed some movement on board the submarine. Tom
could see his father looking from the conning tower, and the aged
inventor seemed to be making some motions. Then Tom understood. Mr.
Swift was directing his son and Captain Weston to crouch down. The lad
did so, pulling the sailor after him. Then Tom saw the bow electric gun
run out, and aimed at the mass of sharks, most of whom were congregated
about the dead one. Into the midst of the monsters was fired a number
of small projectiles, which could be used in the electric cannon in
place of the solid shot. Once more the waters were red with blood, and
those sharks which were not killed swirled off. Tom and Captain Weston
were saved. They were soon inside the submarine again, telling their
thrilling story.

"It's lucky you saw us, dad," remarked the lad, blushing at the praise
Mr. Damon bestowed on him for killing the monster which had attacked
the captain.

"Oh, I was on the lookout," said the inventor. "But what about getting
into the wreck?"

"I think the only way we can do it will be to ram a hole in her side,"
said Captain Weston. "That was what I tried to tell Tom by motions, but
he didn't seem to understand me."

"No," replied the lad, who was still a little nervous from his recent
experience. "I thought you meant for us to turn it over, bottom side
up," and he laughed.

"Bless my gizzard!  Just like a shark," commented Mr. Damon.

"Please don't mention them," begged Tom. "I hope we don't see any more
of them."

"Oh, I fancy they have been driven far enough away from this
neighborhood now," commented the captain. "But now about the wreck. We
may be able to approach it from above.  Suppose we try to lower the
submarine on it? That will save ripping it open."

This was tried a little later, but would not work. There were strong
currents sweeping over the top of the Boldero, caused by a submerged
reef near which she had settled. It was a delicate task to sink the
submarine on her decks, and with the deep waters swirling about was
found to be impossible, even with the use of the electric plates and
the auxiliary screws. Once more the Advance settled to the ocean bed,
near the wreck.

"Well, what's to be done?" asked Tom, as he looked at the high steel
sides.

"Ram her, tear a hole, and then use dynamite," decided Captain Weston
promptly. "You have some explosive, haven't you, Mr. Swift?"

"Oh, yes. I came prepared for emergencies."

"Then we'll blow up the wreck and get at the gold."




Chapter Twenty-Four

Ramming the Wreck


Fitted with a long, sharp steel ram in front, the Advance was
peculiarly adapted for this sort of work. In designing the ship this
ram was calculated to be used against hostile vessels in war time, for
the submarine was at first, as we know, destined for a Government boat.
Now the ram was to serve a good turn.

To make sure that the attempt would be a success, the machinery of the
craft was carefully gone over. It was found to be in perfect order,
save for a few adjustments which were needed. Then, as it was night,
though there was no difference in the appearance of things below the
surface, it was decided to turn in, and begin work in the morning. Nor
did the gold-seekers go to the surface, for they feared they might
encounter a storm.

"We had trouble enough locating the wreck," said Captain Weston, "and
if we go up we may be blown off our course. We have air enough to stay
below, haven't we, Tom?"

"Plenty," answered the lad, looking at the gages.

After a hearty breakfast the next morning, the submarine crew got ready
for their hard task. The craft was backed away as far as was practical,
and then, running at full speed, she rammed the wreck. The shock was
terrific, and at first it was feared some damage had been done to the
Advance, but she stood the strain.

"Did we open up much of a hole?" anxiously asked Mr. Swift.

"Pretty good," replied Tom, observing it through the conning tower
bull's-eyes, when the submarine had backed off again. "Let's give her
another."

Once more the great steel ram hit into the side of the Boldero, and
again the submarine shivered from the shock.  But there was a bigger
hole in the wreck now, and after Captain Weston had viewed it he
decided it was large enough to allow a person to enter and place a
charge of dynamite so that the treasure ship would be broken up.

Tom and the captain placed the explosive. Then the Advance was
withdrawn to a safe distance. There was a dull rumble, a great swirling
of the water, which was made murky; but when it cleared, and the
submarine went back, it was seen that the wreck was effectively broken
up. It was in two parts, each one easy of access.

"That's the stuff!" cried Tom. "Now to get at the gold!"

"Yes, get out the diving suits," added Mr. Damon. "Bless my
watch-charm, I think I'll chance it in one myself! Do you think the
sharks are all gone, Captain Weston?"

"I think so."

In a short time Tom, the captain, Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon were attired
in the diving suits, Mr. Swift not caring to venture into such a great
depth of water. Besides, it was necessary for at least one person to
remain in the submarine to operate the diving chamber.

Walking slowly along the bottom of the sea the four gold-seekers
approached the wreck. They looked on all sides for a sight of the
sharks, but the monster fish seemed to have deserted that part of the
ocean. Tom was the first to reach the now disrupted steamer. He found
he could easily climb up, for boxes and barrels from the cargo holds
were scattered all about by the explosion. Captain Weston soon joined
the lad. The sailor motioned Tom to follow him, and being more familiar
with ocean craft the captain was permitted to take the lead. He headed
aft, seeking to locate the captain's cabin. Nor was he long in finding
it. He motioned for the others to enter, that the combined illumination
of the lamps in their helmets would make the place bright enough so a
search could be made for the gold.  Tom suddenly seized the arm of the
captain, and pointed to one corner of the cabin. There stood a small
safe, and at the sight of it Captain Weston moved toward it. The door
was not locked, probably having been left open when the ship was
deserted. Swinging it back the interior was revealed.

It was empty. There was no gold bullion in it.

There was no mistaking the dejected air of Captain Weston.  The others
shared his feelings, but though they all felt like voicing their
disappointment, not a word could be spoken. Mr. Sharp, by vigorous
motions, indicated to his companions to seek further.

They did so, spending all the rest of the day in the wreck, save for a
short interval for dinner. But no gold rewarded their search.

Tom, late that afternoon, wandered away from the others, and found
himself in the captain's cabin again, with the empty safe showing dimly
in the water that was all about.

"Hang it all!" thought the lad, "we've had all our trouble for nothing!
They must have taken the gold with them."

Idly he raised his steel bar, and struck it against the partition back
of the safe. To his astonishment the partition seemed to fall inward,
revealing a secret compartment. The lad leaned forward to bring the
light for his helmet to play on the recess. He saw a number of boxes,
piled one upon the other. He had accidentally touched a hidden spring
and opened a secret receptacle. But what did it contain?

Tom reached in and tried to lift one of the boxes. He found it beyond
his strength. Trembling from excitement, he went in search of the
others. He found them delving in the after part of the wreck, but by
motions our hero caused them to follow him. Captain Weston showed the
excitement he felt as soon as he caught sight of the boxes. He and Mr.
Sharp lifted one out, and placed it on the cabin floor. They pried off
the top with their bars.

There, packed in layers, were small yellow bars; dull, gleaming, yellow
bars! It needed but a glance to show that they were gold bullion. Tom
had found the treasure. The lad tried to dance around there in the
cabin of the wreck, nearly three miles below the surface of the ocean,
but the pressure of water was too much for him. Their trip had been
successful.




Chapter Twenty-Five

Home With the Gold


There was no time to be lost. They were in a treacherous part of the
ocean, and strong currents might at any time further break up the
wreck, so that they could not come at the gold. It was decided, by
means of motions, to at once transfer the treasure to the submarine. As
the boxes were too heavy to carry easily, especially as two men, who
were required to lift one, could not walk together in the uncertain
footing afforded by the wreck, another plan was adopted. The boxes were
opened and the bars, a few at a time, were dropped on a firm, sandy
place at the side of the wreck. Tom and Captain Weston did this work,
while Mr. Sharp and Mr. Damon carried the bullion to the diving chamber
of the Advance. They put the yellow bars inside, and when quite a
number had been thus shifted, Mr. Swift, closing the chamber, pumped
the water out and removed the gold. Then he opened the chamber to the
divers again, and the process was repeated, until all the bullion had
been secured.

Tom would have been glad to make a further examination of the wreck,
for he thought he could get some of the rifles the ship carried, but
Captain Weston signed to him not to attempt this.

The lad went to the pilot house, while his father and Mr. Sharp took
their places in the engine-room. The gold had been safely stowed in Mr.
Swift's cabin.

Tom took a last look at the wreck before he gave the starting signal.
As he gazed at the bent and twisted mass of steel that had once been a
great ship, he saw something long, black and shadowy moving around from
the other side, coming across the bows.

"There's another big shark," he observed to Captain Weston. "They're
coming back after us."

The captain did not speak. He was staring at the dark form. Suddenly,
from what seemed the pointed nose of it, there gleamed a light, as from
some great eye.

"Look at that!" cried Tom. "That's no shark!"

"If you want my opinion," remarked the sailor, "I should say it was the
other submarine--that of Berg and his friends--the Wonder. They've
managed to fix up their craft and are after the gold."

"But they're too late!" cried Tom excitedly. "Let's tell them so."

"No," advised the captain. "We don't want any trouble with them."

Mr. Swift came forward to see why his son had not given the signal to
start. He was shown the other submarine, for now that the Wonder had
turned on several searchlights, there was no doubt as to the identity
of the craft.

"Let's get away unobserved if we can," he suggested. "We have had
trouble enough."

It was easy to do this, as the Advance was hidden behind the wreck, and
her lights were glowing but dimly. Then, too, those in the other
submarine were so excited over the finding of what they supposed was
the wreck containing the treasure, that they paid little attention to
anything else.

"I wonder how they'll feel when they find the gold gone?" asked Tom as
he pulled the lever starting the pumps.

"Well, we may have a chance to learn, when we get back to
civilization," remarked the captain.

The surface was soon reached, and then, under fair skies, and on a calm
sea, the voyage home was begun. Part of the time the Advance sailed on
the top, and part of the time submerged.

They met with but a single accident, and that was when the forward
electrical plate broke. But with the aft one still in commission, and
the auxiliary screws, they made good time. Just before reaching home
they settled down to the bottom and donned the diving suits again, even
Mr. Swift taking his turn. Mr. Damon caught some large lobsters, of
which he was very fond, or, rather, to be more correct, the lobsters
caught him. When he entered the diving chamber there were four fine
ones clinging to different parts of his diving suit. Some of them were
served for dinner.

The adventurers safely reached the New Jersey coast, and the submarine
was docked. Mr. Swift at once communicated with the proper authorities
concerning the recovery of the gold. He offered to divide with the
actual owners, after he and his friends had been paid for their
services, but as the revolutionary party to whom the bullion was
intended had gone out of existence, there was no one to officially
claim the treasure, so it all went to Tom and his friends, who made an
equitable distribution of it. The young inventor did not forget to buy
Mrs. Baggert a fine diamond ring, as he had promised.

As for Berg and his employers, they were, it was learned later, greatly
chagrined at finding the wreck valueless.  They tried to make trouble
for Tom and his father, but were not successful.

A few days after arriving at the seacoast cottage, Tom, his father and
Mr. Damon went to Shopton in the airship.  Captain Weston, Garret
Jackson and Mr Sharp remained behind in charge of the submarine. It was
decided that the Swifts would keep the craft and not sell it to the
Government, as Tom said they might want to go after more treasure some
day.

"I must first deposit this gold," said Mr. Swift as the airship landed
in front of the shed at his home. "It won't do to keep it in the house
over night, even if the Happy Harry gang is in jail."

Tom helped him take it to the bank. As they were making perhaps the
largest single deposit ever put in the institution, Ned Newton came out.

"Well, Tom," he cried to his chum, "it seems that you are never going
to stop doing things. You've conquered the air, the earth and the
water."

"What have you been doing while I've been under water, Ned?" asked the
young inventor.

"Oh, the same old thing. Running errands and doing all sorts of work in
the bank."

Tom had a sudden idea. He whispered to his father and Mr. Swift nodded.
A little later he was closeted with Mr. Prendergast, the bank
president. It was not long before Ned and Tom were called in.

"I have some good news for you, Ned," said Mr. Prendergast, while Tom
smiled. "Mr. Swift er--ahem--one of our largest depositors, has spoken
to me about you, Ned. I find that you have been very faithful. You are
hereby appointed assistant cashier, and of course you will get a much
larger salary."

Ned could hardly believe it, but he knew then what Tom had whispered to
Mr. Swift. The wishes of a depositor who brings much gold bullion to a
bank can hardly be ignored.

"Come on out and have some soda," invited Tom, and when Ned looked
inquiringly at the president, the latter nodded an assent.

As the two lads were crossing the street to a drug store, something
whizzed past them, nearly running them down.

"What sort of an auto was that?" cried Tom.

"That? Oh, that was Andy Foger's new car," answered Ned.  "He's been
breaking the speed laws every day lately, but no one seems to bother
him. It's because his father is rich, I suppose. Andy says he has the
fastest car ever built."

"He has, eh?" remarked Tom, while a curious look came into his eyes.
"Well, maybe I can build one that will beat his."

And whether the young inventor did or not you can learn by reading the
fifth volume of this series, to be called "Tom Swift and His Electric
Runabout; Or, The Speediest Car on the Road."

"Well, Tom, I certainly appreciate what you did for me in getting me a
better position," remarked Ned as they left the drug store. "I was
beginning to think I'd never get promoted. Say, have you anything to do
this evening? If you haven't, I wish you'd come over to my house. I've
got a lot of pictures I took while you were away."

"Sorry, but I can't," replied Tom.

"Why, are you going to build another airship or submarine?"

"No, but I'm going to see-- Oh, what do you want to know for, anyhow?"
demanded the young inventor with a blush.  "Can't a fellow go see a
girl without being cross-questioned?"

"Oh, of course," replied Ned with a laugh. "Give Miss Nestor my
regards," and at this Tom blushed still more. But, as he said, that was
his own affair.

========================================
========================================

TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR-BOAT

Or

The Rivals of Lake Carlopa


By

VICTOR APPLETON




CONTENTS

     I  A Motor-boat Auction
    II  Some Lively Bidding
   III  A Timely Warning
    IV  Tom And Andy Clash
     V  A Test Of Speed
    VI  Towing Some Girls
   VII  A Brush With Andy
  VIII  Off On A Trip
    IX  Mr. Swift Is Alarmed
     X  A Cry For Help
    XI  A Quick Run
   XII  Suspicious Characters
  XIII  Tom In Danger
   XIV  The ARROW Disappears
    XV  A Damaging Statement
   XVI  Still On The Search
  XVII  "There She Is!"
 XVIII  The Pursuit
   XIX  A Quiet Cruise
    XX  News Of A Robbery
   XXI  The Balloon On Fire
  XXII  The Rescue
 XXIII  Plans For An Airship
  XXIV  The Mystery Solved
   XXV  Winning A Race




CHAPTER I

A MOTOR-BOAT AUCTION


"Where are you going, Tom?" asked Mr. Barton Swift of his son as the
young man was slowly pushing his motor-cycle out of the yard toward the
country road.  "You look as though you had some object in view."

"So I have, dad.  I'm going over to Lanton."

"To Lanton?  What for?"

"I want to have a look at that motor-boat."

"Which boat is that, Tom? I don't recall your speaking about a boat
over at Lanton.  What do you want to look at it for?"

"It's the motor-boat those fellows had who tried to get away with your
turbine model invention, dad.  The one they used at the old General
Harkness mansion, in the woods near the lake, and the same boat that
fellow used when he got away from me the day I was chasing him here."

"Oh, yes, I remember now.  But what is the boat doing over at Lanton?"

"That's where it belongs.  It's the property of Mr. Bently Hastings.
The thieves stole it from him, and when they ran away from the old
mansion, the time Mr. Damon and I raided the place, they left the boat
on the lake.  I turned it over to the county authorities, and they
found out it belonged to Mr. Hastings.  He has it back now, but I
understand it's somewhat damaged, and he wants to get rid of it.  He's
going to sell it at auction to-day, and I thought I'd go over and take
a look at it.  You see--"

"Yes, I see, Tom," exclaimed Mr. Swift with a laugh.  "I see what
you're aiming at.  You want a motor-boat, and you're going all around
Robin Hood's barn to get at it."

"No, dad, I only--"

"Oh, I know you, Tom, my lad!" interrupted the inventor, shaking his
finger at his son, who seemed somewhat confused.  "You have a nice
rowing skiff and a sailboat, yet you are hankering for a motor-boat.
Come now, own up.  Aren't you?"

"Well, dad, a motor-boat certainly would go fine on Lake Carlopa.
There's plenty of room to speed her, and I wonder there aren't more of
them.  I was going to see what Mr. Hastings' boat would sell for, but I
didn't exactly think of buying it' Still--"

"But you wouldn't buy a damaged boat, would you?"

"It isn't much damaged," and in his eagerness the young inventor (for
Tom Swift had taken out several patents) stood his motor-cycle up
against the fence and came closer to his father.  "It's only slightly
damaged," he went on. "I can easily fix it.  I looked it all over
before I gave it in charge of the authorities, and it's certainly a
fine boat. It's worth nine hundred dollars--or it was when it was new."

"That's a good deal of money for a boat," and Mr. Swift looked serious,
for though he was well off, he was inclined to be conservative.

"Oh, I shouldn't think of paying that much.  In fact, dad, I really had
no idea of bidding at the auction.  I only thought I'd go over and get
an idea of what the boat might sell for.  Perhaps some day--"

Tom paused.  Since his father had begun to question him some new plans
had come into the lad's head.  He looked at his parent and saw a smile
beginning to work around the corners of Mr. Swift's lips.  There was
also a humorous look in the eyes of the older inventor.  He understood
boys fairly well, even if he only had one, and he knew Tom perfectly.

"Would you really like to make a bid on that boat Tom?" he asked.

"Would I, dad? Well--" The youth did not finish, but his father knew
what he meant.

"I suppose a motor-boat would be a nice thing to have on Lake Carlopa,"
went on Mr. Swift musingly.  "You and I could take frequent trips in
it.  It isn't like a motor-cycle, only useful for one.  What do you
suppose the boat will go for, Tom?"

"I hardly know.  Not a high price, I believe, for motor-boats are so
new on our lake that few persons will take a chance on them.  But if
Mr. Hastings is getting another, he will not be so particular about
insisting on a high price for the old one.  Then, too, the fact that it
is damaged will help to keep the price down, though I know I can easily
put it in good shape.  I would like to make a bid, if you think it's
all right."

"Well, I guess you may, Tom, if you really want it.  You have money of
your own and a motor-boat is not a bad investment.  What do you think
ought to be the limit?"

"Would you consider a hundred and fifty dollars too high?"

Mr. Swift looked at Tom critically.  He was plainly going over several
matters in his mind, and not the least of them was the pluck his son
had shown in getting back some valuable papers and a model from a gang
of thieves.  The lad certainly was entitled to some reward, and to
allow him to get a boat might properly be part of it.

"I think you could safely go as high as two hundred dollars, Tom," said
Mr. Swift at length.  "That would be my limit on a damaged boat for it
might be better to pay a little more and get a new one.  However, use
your own judgment, but don't go over two hundred.  So the thieves who
made so much trouble for me stole that boat from Mr. Hastings, eh?"

"Yes, and they didn't take much care of it either.  They damaged the
engine, but the hull is in good shape.  I'm ever so glad you'll let me
bid on it.  I'll start right off.  The auction is at ten o'clock and I
haven't more than time to get there."

"Now be careful how you bid.  Don't raise your own figures, as I've
sometimes seen women, and men too, do in their excitement.  Somebody
may go over your head; and if he does, let them.  If you get the boat
I'll be very glad on your account.  But don't bring any of Anson
Morse's gang back in it with you.  I've seen enough of them."

"I'll not dad!" cried Tom as he trundled his motor-cycle out of the
gate and into the country road that led to the village of Shopton,
where he lived, and to Lanton, where the auction was to be held.  The
young inventor had not gone far before he turned back, leaving his
machine standing on the side path.

"What's the matter?" asked his father, who had started toward one of
several machine shops on the premises--shops where Mr. Swift and his
son did inventive work.

"Guess I'd better get a blank check and some money," replied Tom as he
entered the house.  "I'll need to pay a deposit if I secure the boat."

"That's so.  Well, good luck," and with his mind busy on a plan for a
new kind of storage battery, the inventor went on to his workroom.  Tom
got some cash and his checkbook from a small safe he owned and was soon
speeding over the road to Lanton, his motor-cycle making quite a cloud
of dust.  While he is thus hurrying along to the auction I will tell
you something about him.

Tom Swift, son of Barton Swift, lived with his father and a motherly
housekeeper, Mrs. Baggert, in a large house on the outskirts of the
town of Shopton, in New York State.  Mr. Swift had acquired
considerable wealth from his many inventions and patents, but he did
not give up working out his ideas simply because he had plenty of
money.  Tom followed in the footsteps of his parent and had already
taken out several patents.

Shortly before this story opens the youth had become possessed of a
motor-cycle in a peculiar fashion.  As told in the first volume of this
series, entitled "Tom Swift and His Motor-cycle," Tom was riding to the
town of Mansburg on an errand for his father one day when he was nearly
run down by a motorcyclist.  A little later the same motorcyclist, who
was a Mr. Wakefield Damon, of Waterfield, collided with a tree near
Tom's home and was severely cut and bruised, the machine being broken.
Tom and his father cared for the injured rider, and Mr. Damon, who was
an eccentric individual, was so disheartened by his attempts to ride
the motor-cycle that he sold it to Tom for fifty dollars, though it had
cost much more.

About the same time that Tom bought the motor-cycle a firm of rascally
lawyers, Smeak & Katch by name, had, in conjunction with several men,
made an attempt to get control of an invention of a turbine motor
perfected by Mr. Swift.  The men, who were Ferguson Appleson, Anson
Morse, Wilson Featherton, alias Simpson, and Jake Burke, alias Happy
Harry, who sometimes disguised himself as a tramp, tried several times
to steal the model.

Their anxiety to get it was due to the fact that they had invested a
large sum in a turbine motor invented by another man, but their motor
would not work and they sought to steal Mr. Swift's.  Tom was sent to
Albany on his motor-cycle to deliver the model and some valuable papers
to Mr. Crawford, of the law firm of Reid & Crawford, of Washington,
attorneys for Mr. Swift.  Mr. Crawford had an errand in Albany and had
agreed to meet Tom there with the model.

But, on the way, Tom was attacked by the gang of unscrupulous men and
the model was stolen.  He was assaulted and carried far away in an
automobile.  In an attempt to capture the gang in a deserted mansion,
in the woods on the shore of Lake Carlopa, Tom was aided by Mr. Damon,
of whom he had purchased the motor-cycle.  The men escaped, however,
and nothing could be done to punish them.

Tom was thinking of the exciting scenes he had passed through about a
month previous as he spun along the road leading to Lanton.

"I hope I don't meet Happy Harry or any of his gang to-day," mused the
lad as he turned on a little more power to enable his machine to mount
a hill.  "I don't believe they'll attend the auction, though.  It would
be too risky for them."

As Tom swung along at a rapid pace he heard, behind him, the puffing of
an automobile, with the muffler cut out.  He turned and cast a hasty
glance behind.

"I hope that ain't Andy Foger or any of his cronies," he said to
himself.  "He might try to run me down just for spite.  He generally
rushes along with the muffler open so as to attract attention and make
folks think he has a racing car."

It was not Andy, however, as Tom saw a little later, as a man passed
him in a big touring car.  Andy Foger, as my readers will recollect,
was a red-haired, squinty-eyed lad with plenty of money and not much
else.  He and his cronies, including Sam Snedecker, nearly ran Tom down
one day, when the latter was on his bicycle, as told in the first
volume of this series.  Andy had been off on a tour with his chums
during the time when Tom was having such strenuous adventures and had
recently returned.

"If I can only get that boat," mused Tom as he swung back into the
middle of the road after the auto had passed him, "I certainly will
have lots of fun.  I'll make a week's tour of Lake Carlopa and take dad
and Ned Newton with me." Ned was Tom's most particular chum, but as
young Newton was employed in the Shopton bank, the lad did not have
much time for pleasure.  Lake Carlopa was a large body of water, and it
would take a moderately powered boat several days to make a complete
circuit of the shore, so cut up into bays and inlets was it.

In about an hour Tom was at Lanton, and as he neared the home of Mr.
Hastings, which was on the shore of the lake, he saw quite a throng
going down toward the boathouse.

"There'll be some lively bidding," thought Tom as he got off his
machine and pushed it ahead of him through the drive and down toward
the river.  "I hope they don't go above two hundred dollars, though."

"Get out the way there!" called a sudden voice, and looking back, Tom
saw that an automobile had crept up silently behind him.  In it were
Andy Foger and Sam Snedecker.  "Why don't you get out the way?"
petulantly demanded the red-haired lad.

"Because I don't choose to," replied Tom calmly, knowing that Andy
would never dare to speed up his machine on the slope leading down to
the lake.

"Go ahead, bump him!" the young inventor heard Sam whisper.

"You'd better try it, if you want to get the best trouncing you ever
had!" cried Tom hotly.

"Hu! I s'pose you think you're going to bid on the boat?" sneered Andy.

"Is there any law against it?" asked Tom.

"Hu! Well, you'll not get it.  I'm going to take that boat," retorted
the squint-eyed bully.  "Dad gave me the money to get it."

"All right," answered Tom non-committally.  "Go ahead.  It's a free
country."

He stood his motor-cycle up against a tree and went toward a group of
persons who were surrounding the auctioneer.  The time had arrived to
start the sale.  As Tom edged in closer he brushed against a man who
looked at him sharply.  The lad was just wondering if he had ever seen
the individual before, as there seemed to be something strangely
familiar about him, when the man turned quickly away, as if afraid of
being recognized.

"That's odd," thought Tom, but he had no further time for speculation,
as the auctioneer was mounting on a soapbox and had begun to address
the gathering.




CHAPTER II

SOME LIVELY BIDDING


"Attention, people!" cried the auctioneer.  "Give me your attention for
a few minutes, and we will proceed with the business in hand.  As you
all know, I am about to dispose of a fine motor-boat, the property of
Mr. Bently Hastings.  The reason for disposing of it at auction is
known to most of you, but for the benefit of those who do not, I will
briefly state them.  The boat was stolen by a gang of thieves and
recovered recently through the efforts of a young man, Thomas Swift,
son of Barton Swift, our fellow-townsman, of Shopton." At that moment
the auctioneer, Jacob Wood, caught sight of Tom in the press, and,
looking directly at the lad, continued:

"I understand that young Mr. Swift is here to-day, and I hope he
intends to bid on this boat.  If he does, the bidding will be lively,
for Tom Swift is a lively young man.  I wish I could say that some of
the men who stole the boat were here to-day."

The auctioneer paused and there were some murmurs from those in the
throng as to why such a wish should be uttered.  Tom felt some one
moving near him, and, looking around, he saw the same man with whom he
had come in contact before.  The person seemed desirous of getting out
on the edge of the crowd, and Tom felt a return of his vague
suspicions.  He looked closely at the fellow, but could trace no
resemblance to any of the men who had so daringly stolen his father's
model.

"The reason I wish they were here to-day," went on Mr. Wood, "is that
the men did some slight damage to the boat, and if they were here
to-day we would make them pay for it.  However, the damage is slight
and can easily be repaired.  I mention that, as Mr. Hastings desired me
to.  Now we will proceed with the bidding, and I will say that an
opportunity will first be given all to examine the boat.  Perhaps Tom
Swift will give us his opinion on the state it is in as we know he is
well qualified to talk about machinery."

All eyes were turned on Tom, for many knew him.

"Humph! I guess I know as much about boats and motors as he does,"
sneered Andy Foger.  "He isn't the only one in this crowd! Why didn't
the auctioneer ask me?"

"Keep quiet," begged Sam Snedecker.  "People are laughing at you, Andy."

"I don't care if they are," muttered the sandy haired youth.  "Tom
Swift needn't think he's everything."

"If you will come down to the dock," went on the auctioneer, "you can
all see the boat, and I would be glad to have young Mr. Swift give us
the benefit of his advice."

The throng trooped down to the lake, and, blushing somewhat, Tom told
what was the matter with the motor and how it could be fixed.  It was
noticed that there was less enthusiasm over the matter than there had
been, for certainly the engine, rusty and out of order as it was, did
not present an attractive sight.  Tom noted that the man, who had acted
so strangely, did not come down to the dock.

"Guess he can't be much interested in the motor," decided Tom.

"Now then, if it's all the same to you folks, I'll proceed with the
auction here," went on Mr. Wood.  "You can all see the boat from here.
It is, as you see, a regular family launch and will carry twelve
persons comfortably.  With a canopy fitted to it a person could cruise
all about the lake and stay out over night, for you could sleep on the
seat cushions.  It is twenty-one feet in length and has a
five-and-a-half-foot beam, the design being what is known as a
compromise stern.  The motor is a double-cylinder two-cycle one, of ten
horsepower.  It has a float-feed carburetor, mechanical oiler, and the
ignition system is the jump-spark--the best for this style of motor.
The boat will make ten miles an hour, with twelve in, and, of course,
more than that with a lighter load.  A good deal will depend on the way
the motor is managed.

"Now, as you know, Mr. Hastings wishes to dispose of the boat partly
because he does not wish to repair it and partly because he has a newer
and larger one.  The craft, which is named CARLOPA by the way, cost
originally nine hundred dollars.  It could not be purchased new to-day,
in many places, for a thousand.  Now what am I offered in its present
condition? Will any one make an offer?  Will you give me five hundred
dollars?"

The auctioneer paused and looked critically at the throng.  Several
persons smiled.  Tom looked worried.  He had no idea that the price
would start so high.

"Well, perhaps that is a bit stiff," went on Mr. Wood.  "Shall we say
four hundred dollars? Come now, I'm sure it's worth four hundred.
Who'll start it at four hundred?"

No one would, and the auctioneer descended to three hundred, then to
two and finally, as if impatient, he called out:

"Well, will any one start at fifty dollars?"

Instantly there were several cries of "I will!"

"I thought you would," went on the auctioneer.  "Now we will get down
to work.  I'm offered fifty dollars for this twenty-one foot, ten
horsepower family launch.  Will any one make it sixty?"

"Sixty!" called out Andy Foger in a shrill voice.  Several turned to
look at him.

"I didn't know he was going to bid," thought Tom.  "He may go above me.
He's got plenty of money, and, while I have too, I'm not going to pay
too much for a damaged boat."

"Sixty I'm bid, sixty--sixty!" cried Mr. Wood in a sing-song tone,
"who'll make it seventy?"

"Sixty-five!" spoke a quiet voice at Tom's elbow, and he turned to see
the mysterious man who had joined the crowd at the edge of the lake.

"Sixty-five from the gentleman in the white straw hat!" called Mr. Wood
with a smile at his wit, for there were many men wearing white straw
hats, the day being a warm one in June.

"Here, who's bidding above me?" exclaimed Andy, as if it was against
the law.

"I guess you'll find a number going ahead of you, my young friend,"
remarked the auctioneer.  "Will you have the goodness not to interrupt
me, except when you want to bid?"

"Well, I offered sixty," said the squint-eyed bully, while his crony,
Sam Snedecker, was vainly, pulling at his sleeve.

"I know you did, and this gentleman went above you.  If you want to bid
more you can do so.  I'm offered sixty-five, sixty-five I'm offered for
this boat.  Will any one make it seventy-five?"

Mr. Wood looked at Tom, and our hero, thinking it was time for him to
make a bid, offered seventy. "Seventy from Tom Swift!" cried the
auctioneer. "There is a lad who knows a motor-boat from stem to stern,
if those are the right words. I don't know much about boats except what
I'm told, but Tom Swift does. Now, if he bids, you people ought to know
that it's all right. I'm bid seventy--seventy I'm bid. Will any one
make it eighty?"

"Eighty!" exclaimed Andy Foger after a whispered conference with Sam.
"I know as much about boats as Tom Swift.  I'll make it eighty."

"No side remarks. I'll do most of the talking. You just bid, young
man," remarked Mr. Wood. "I have eighty bid for this boat--eighty
dollars. Why, my friends, I can't understand this.  I ought to have it
up to three hundred dollars, at least. But I thank you all the same. We
are coming on. I'm bid eighty--"

"Ninety!" exclaimed the quiet man at Tom's elbow.  He was continually
fingering his upper lip, as though he had a mustache there, but his
face was clean-shaven.  He looked around nervously as he spoke.

"Ninety!" called out the auctioneer.

"Ninety-five!" returned Tom.  Andy Foger scowled at him, but the young
inventor only smiled.  It was evident that the bully did not relish
being bid against.  He and his crony whispered together again.

"One hundred!" called Andy, as if no one would dare go above that.

"I'm offered an even hundred," resumed Mr. Wood.  "We are certainly
coming on.  A hundred I am bid, a hundred--a hundred--a hundred--"

"And five," said the strange man hastily, and he seemed to choke as he
uttered the words.

"Oh, come now; we ought to have at least ten-dollar bids from now on,"
suggested Mr. Wood.  "Won't you make it a hundred and ten?" The
auctioneer looked directly at the man, who seemed to shrink back into
the crowd.  He shook his head, cast a sort of despairing look at the
boat and hurried away.

"That's queer," murmured Tom.  "I guess that was his limit, yet if he
wanted the boat badly that wasn't a high price."

"Who's going ahead of me?" demanded Andy in loud tones.

"Keep quiet!" urged Sam.  "We may get it yet."

"Yes, don't make so many remarks," counseled the auctioneer.  "I'm bid
a hundred and five.  Will any one make it a hundred and twenty-five?"

Tom wondered why the man had not remained to see if his bid was
accepted, for no one raised it at once, but he hurried off and did not
look back.  Tom took a sudden resolve.

"A hundred and twenty-five!" he called out.

"That's what I like to hear," exclaimed Mr. Wood.  "Now we are doing
business.  A hundred and twenty-five from Tom Swift.  Will any one
offer me fifty?"

Andy and Sam seemed to be having some dispute.

"Let's make him quit right now," suggested Andy in a hoarse whisper.

"You can't," declared Sam'

"Yes, I can.  I'll go up to my limit right now."

"And some one will go above you---maybe Tom will," was Sam's retort.

"I don't believe he can afford to," Andy came back with.  "I'm going to
call his bluffs.  I believe he's only bidding to make others think he
wants it.  I don't believe he'll buy it."

Tom heard what was said, but did not reply.  The auctioneer was calling
monotonously: "I'm bid a hundred and twenty-five--twenty-five.  Will
any one make it fifty?"

"A hundred and fifty!" sang out Andy, and all eyes were directed toward
him.

"Sixty!" said Tom quietly.

"Here, you--" began the red-haired lad.  "You--"

"That will do!" exclaimed the auctioneer sternly.  "I am offered a
hundred and sixty.  Now who will give me an advance? I want to get the
boat up to two hundred, and then the real bidding will begin."

Tom's heart sank.  He hoped it would be some time before a two hundred
dollar offer would be heard.  As for Andy Foger, he was almost
speechless with rage.  He shook off the restraining arm of Sam, and,
worming his way to the front of the throng, exclaimed:

"I'll give a hundred and seventy-five dollars for that boat!"

"Good!" cried the auctioneer.  "That's the way to talk.  I'm offered a
hundred and seventy-five."

"Eighty," said Tom quietly, though his heart was beating fast.

"Well, of all--" began Andy, but Sam Snedecker dragged him back.

"You haven't got any more money," said the bully's crony.  "Better stop
now."

"I will not! I'm going home for more," declared Andy.  "I must have
that boat."

"It will be sold when you get back," said Sam.

"Haven't you got any money you can lend me?" inquired the squint-eyed
one, scowling in Tom's direction.  "No, not a bit.  There, some one
raised Tom's bid."

At that moment a man in the crowd offered a hundred and eighty-one
dollars.

"Small amounts thankfully received," said Mr. Wood with a laugh.  Then
the bidding became lively, a number making one-dollar advances.

The price got up to one hundred and ninety-five dollars and there it
hung for several minutes, despite the eloquence of Mr. Wood, who tried
by all his persuasive powers to get a substantial advance.  But every
one seemed afraid to bid.  As for the young inventor, he was in a
quandary.  He could only offer five dollars more, and, if he bid it in
a lump, some one might go to two hundred and five, and he would not get
the boat.  He wished he had secured permission from his father to go
higher, yet he knew that as a fair proposition two hundred dollars was
about all the motor-boat in its present condition was worth, at least
to him.  Then he made a sudden resolve.  He thought he might as well
have the suspense over.

"Two hundred dollars!" he called boldly.

"I'm offered two hundred!" repeated Mr. Wood.  "That is something like
it.  Now who will raise that?"

There was a moment of silence.  Then the auctioneer swung into an
enthusiastic description of the boat.  He begged for an advance, but
none was made, though Tom's heart seemed in his throat, so afraid was
he that he would not get the CARLOPA.

"Two hundred--two hundred!" droned on Mr. Wood. "I am offered two
hundred. Will any of you go any higher?" He paused a moment, and Tom's
heart beat harder than ever. "If not," resumed the speaker, "I will
declare the bidding closed. Are you all done?  Once--twice--three
times. Two hundred dollars. Going--going--gone!" He clapped his hands.
"The boat is sold to Thomas Swift for two hundred dollars. If he'll
step up I'll take his money."

There was a laugh as Tom, blushingly, advanced.  He passed Andy Foger,
who had worked his way over near him.

"You got the boat," sneered the bully, "and I s'pose you think you got
ahead of me."

"Keep quiet!" begged Sam.

"I won't!" exclaimed Andy.  "He outbid me just out of spite, and I'll
get even with him.  You see if I don't!"

Tom looked Andy Foger straight in the eyes, but did not answer, and the
red-haired youth turned aside, followed by his crony, and started
toward his automobile.

"I congratulate you on your bargain," said Mr. Wood as Tom proceeded to
make out a check.  He gave little thought to the threat Andy Foger had
made, but the time was coming when he was to remember it well.




CHAPTER III

A TIMELY WARNING


"Well, are you satisfied with your bargain, Tom?" asked Mr. Wood when
the formalities about transferring the ownership of the motor-boat had
been completed.

"Oh, yes, I calculated to pay just what I did."

"I'm glad you're satisfied, for Mr. Hastings told me to be sure the
purchaser was satisfied.  Here he comes now.  I guess he wasn't at the
auction."

An elderly gentleman was approaching Mr. Wood and Tom.  Most of the
throng was dispersing, but the young inventor noticed that Andy Foger
and Sam Snedecker stood to one side, regarding him closely.

"So you got my boat," remarked the former owner of the craft.  "I hope
you will be able to fix it up."

"Oh, I think I shall," answered the new owner of the CARLOPA.  "If I
can't, father will help me."

"Yes, you have an advantage there.  Are you going to keep the same
name?" and Mr. Hastings seemed quite interested in what answer the lad
would make.

"I think not," replied Tom.  "It's a good name, but I want something
that tells more what a fast boat it is, for I'm going to make some
changes that will increase the speed."

"That's a good idea. Call it the Swift."

"Folks would say I was stuck up if I did that," retorted the youth
quickly.  "I think I shall call it the ARROW.  That's a good, short
name, and--"

"It's certainly speedy," interrupted Mr. Hastings.  "Well now, since
you're not going to use the name CARLOPA, would you mind if I took it
for my new boat? I have a fancy for it."

"Not in the least," said Tom.  "Don't you want the letters from each
side of the bow to put on your new craft?"

"It's very kind of you to offer them, and, since you will have no need
for them, I'll be glad to take them off."

"Come down to my boat," invited Tom, using the word "my" with a proper
pride, "and I'll take off the brass letters.  I have a screw driver in
my motor-cycle tool bag."

As the former and present owners of the ARROW (which is the name by
which I shall hereafter designate Tom's motor-boat) walked down toward
the dock where it was moored the young inventor gave a startled cry.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Hastings.

"That man! See him at my motor-boat?" cried Tom.  He pointed to the
craft in the lake.  A man was in the cockpit and seemed to be doing
something to the forward bulkhead, which closed off the compartment
holding the gasoline tank.

"Who is he?" asked Mr. Hastings, while Tom started on a run toward the
boat.

"I don't know.  Some man who bid on the boat at the auction, but who
didn't go high enough," answered the lad.  As he neared the craft the
man sprang out, ran along the lakeshore for a short distance and then
disappeared amid the bushes which bordered the estate of Mr. Hastings.
Tom hurriedly entered the ARROW.

"Did he do any damage?" asked Mr. Hastings.

"I guess he didn't have time," responded Tom.  "But he was tampering
with the lock on the door of the forward compartment.  What's in there?"

"Nothing but the gasoline tank.  I keep the bulkhead sliding door
locked on general principles.  I can't imagine what the fellow would
want to open it for.  There's nothing of value in there.  Perhaps he
isn't right in his head.  Was he a tramp?"

"No, he was well dressed but he seemed very nervous during the auction,
as if he was disappointed not to have secured the boat.  Yet what could
he want in that compartment? Have you the key to the lock, Mr.
Hastings?"

"Yes, it belongs to you now, Mr. Swift," and the former owner handed it
to Tom, who quickly unlocked the compartment.  He slid back the door
and peered within, but all he saw was the big galvanized tank.

"Nothing in there he could want," commented the former owner of the
craft.

"No," agreed Tom in a low voice.  "I don't see what he wanted to open
the door for." But the time was to come, and not far off, when Tom was
to discover quite a mystery connected with the forward compartment of
his boat, and the solution of it was fated to bring him into no little
danger.

"It certainly is odd," went on Mr. Hastings when, after Tom had secured
the screw driver from his motor-cycle tool bag, he aided the lad in
removing the letters from the bow of the boat "Are you sure you don't
know the man?"

"No, I never saw him before.  At first I thought his voice sounded like
one of the members of the Happy Harry gang, but when I looked squarely
at him I could not see a bit of resemblance.  Besides, that gang would
not venture again into this neighborhood."

"No, I imagine not.  Perhaps he was only a curious, meddlesome person.
I have frequently been bothered by such individuals.  They want to see
all the working parts of an automobile or motor-boat, and they don't
care what damage they do by investigating."

Tom did not reply, but he was pretty certain that the man in question
had more of an object than mere curiosity in tampering with the boat.
However, he could discover no solution just then, and he proceeded with
the work of taking off the letters.

"What are you going to do with your boat, now that you have it?" asked
Mr. Hastings.  "Can you run it down to your dock in the condition in
which it is now?"

"No, I shall have to go back home, get some tools and fix up the motor.
It will take half a day, at least.  I will come back this afternoon
and, have the boat at my house by night.  That is if I may leave it at
your dock here."

"Certainly, as long as you like."

The young inventor had many things to think about as he rode toward
home, and though he was somewhat puzzled over the actions of the
stranger, he forgot about that in anticipating the pleasure he would
have when the motor-boat was in running order.

"I'll take dad off on a cruise about the lake," he decided.  "He needs
a rest, for he's been working hard and worrying over the theft of the
turbine motor model.  I'll take Ned Newton for some rides, too, and he
can bring his camera along and get a lot of pictures.  Oh, I'll have
some jolly sport this summer!"

Tom was riding swiftly along a quiet country road and was approaching a
steep hill, which he could not see until he was close to it, owing to a
sharp turn.

As he was about to swing around it and coast swiftly down the steep
declivity he was startled by hearing a voice calling to him from the
bushes at the side of the road.

"Hold on, dar! hold on, Mistah Swift!" cried a colored man, suddenly
popping into view.  "Doan't go down dat hill."

"Why, it's Eradicate Sampson!" exclaimed Tom, quickly shutting off the
power and applying the brakes.  "What's the matter, Rad? Why shouldn't
I go down that hill?"

"Beca'se, Mistah Swift, dere's a pow'ful monstrous tree trunk right
across de road at a place whar yo' cain't see it till yo' gits right on
top ob it.  Ef yo' done hit dat ar tree on yo' lickity-split machine,
yo' suah would land in kingdom come.  Doan't go down dat hill!"

Tom leaped off his machine and approached the colored man.  Eradicate
Sampson did odd jobs in the neighborhood of Shopton, and more than once
Tom had done him favors in repairing his lawn mower or his wood-sawing
machine.  In turn Eradicate had given Tom a valuable clue as to the
hiding place of the model thieves.

"How'd the log get across the road, Rad?" asked Tom.

"I dunno, Mistah Swift.  I see it when I come along wid mah mule,
Boomerang, an' I tried t' git it outer de way, but I couldn't.  Den I
left Boomerang an' mah wagon at de foot ob de hill an' I come up heah
t' git a long pole t' pry de log outer de way.  I didn't t'ink nobody
would come along, case dis road ain't much trabeled."

"I took it for a short cut," said the lad.  "Come on, let's take a look
at the log."

Leaving his machine at the top of the slope, the young inventor
accompanied the colored man 'down the hill.  At the foot of it, well
hidden from sight of any one who might come riding down, was a big log.
It was all the way across the road.

"That never fell there," exclaimed Tom in some excitement.  "That never
rolled off a load of logs, even if there had been one along, which
there wasn't.  That log was put there!"

"Does yo' t'ink dat, Mistah Swift?" asked Eradicate, his eyes getting
big.

"I certainly do, and, if you hadn't warned me, I might have been
killed."

"Oh, I heard yo' lickity-split machine chug-chuggin' along when I were
in de bushes, lookin' for a pryin' pole, an' I hurried out to warn yo.
I knowed I could leave Boomerang safe, 'case he's asleep."

"I'm glad you did warn me," went on the youth solemnly.  Then, as he
went closer to the log, he uttered an exclamation.

"That has been dragged here by an automobile!" he cried.  "It's been
done on purpose to injure some one.  Come on, Rad, let's see if we
can't find out who did it."

Something on the ground caught Tom's eye.  He stooped and picked up a
nickle-plated wrench.

"This may come in handy as evidence," he murmured.




CHAPTER IV

TOM AND ANDY CLASH


Even a casual observer could have told that an auto had had some part
in dragging the log to the place where it blockaded the road.  In the
dust were many marks of the big rubber tires and even the imprint of a
rope, which had been used to tow the tree trunk.

"What fo' yo' t'ink any one put dat log dere?" asked the colored man as
he followed Tom.  Boomerang, the mule, so called because Eradicate said
you never could tell what he was going to do, opened his eyes lazily
and closed them again.  "I don't know why, Rad, unless they wanted to
wreck an automobile or a wagon.  Maybe tramps did it for spite."

"Maybe some one done it to make yo' hab trouble, Mistah Swift."

"No, I hardly think so.  I don't know of any one who would want to make
trouble for me, and how would they know I was coming this way--"

Tom suddenly checked himself.  The memory of the scene at the auction
came back to him and he recalled what Andy Foger had said about
"'getting even."

"Which way did dat auto go?" resumed Eradicate.

"It came from down the road," answered Tom, not completing the sentence
he had left unfinished.  "They dragged the log up to the foot of the
hill and left it.  Then the auto went down this way." It was
comparatively easy, for a lad of such sharp observation as was Tom, to
trace the movements of the vehicle.

"Den if it's down heah, maybe we cotch 'em," suggested the colored man.

The young inventor did not answer at once.  He was hurrying along, his
eyes on the telltale marks.  He had proceeded some distance from the
place where the log was when he uttered a cry.  At the same moment he
hurried from the road toward a thick clump of bushes that were in the
ditch alongside of the highway.  Reaching them, he parted the leaves
and called:

"Here's the auto, Rad!"

The colored man ran up, his eyes wider open than ever.  There, hidden
amid the bushes, was a large touring car.

"Whose am dat?" asked Eradicate.

Tom did not answer.  He penetrated the underbrush, noting where the
broken branches had been bent upright after the forced entrance of the
car, the better to hide it.  The young inventor was, seeking some clew
to discover the owner of the machine.  To this end he climbed up in the
tonneau and was looking about when some one burst in through the screen
of bushes and a voice cried: "Here, you get out of my car!"

"Oh, is it your car, Andy Foger?" asked Tom calmly as he recognized his
squint-eyed rival.  "I was just beginning to think it was.  Allow me to
return your wrench," and he held out the one he had picked up near the
log.  "The next time you drag trees across the road," went on the lad
in the tonneau, facing the angry and dismayed Andy, "I'd advise you to
post a notice at the top of the hill, so persons riding down will not
be injured."

"Notice--road--hill--logs!" stammered Andy, turning red under his
freckles.

"That's what I said," replied Tom coolly.

"I--I didn't have anything to do with putting a log across any road,"
mumbled the bully.  "I--I've been off toward the creek."

"Have you?" asked Tom with a peculiar smile.

"I thought you might have been looking for the wrench you dropped near
the log.  You should be more careful and so should Sam Snedecker, who's
hiding outside the bushes," went on our hero, for he had caught sight
of the form of Andy's crony.  "I--I told him not to do it!" exclaimed
Sam as he came from his hiding place.

"Shut up!" exclaimed Andy desperately.

"Oh, I think I know your secret," continued the young inventor.  "You
wanted to get even with me for outbidding you on the motor-boat.  You
watched which road I took, and then, in your auto, you came a shorter
way, ahead of me.  You hauled the log across the foot of the hill,
hoping, I suppose, that my machine would be broken.  But, let me tell
you, it was a risky trick.  Not only might I have been killed, but so
would whoever else who happened to drive down the slope over the log,
whether in a wagon or automobile.  Fortunately Eradicate discovered it
in time and warned me.  I ought to have you arrested, but you're not
worth it.  A good thrashing is what such sneaks as you deserve!"

"You haven't got any evidence against us," sneered Andy confidently,
his old bravado coming back.

"I have all I want," replied Tom.  "You needn't worry.  I'm not going
to tell the police.  But you've got to do one thing or I'll make you
sorry you ever tried this trick.  Eradicate will help me, so don't
think you're going to escape."

"You get out of my automobile!" demanded Andy.  "I'll have you arrested
if you don't."

"I'll get out because I'm ready to, but not on account of your
threats," retorted Mr. Swift's son.  "Here's your wrench.  Now I want
you and Sam to start up this machine and haul that log out of the way."

"S'pose I won't do it?" snapped Andy.

"Then I'll cause your arrest, besides thrashing you into the bargain!
You can take your choice of removing the log so travelers can pass or
having a good hiding, you and Sam.  Eradicate, you take Sam and I'll
tackle Andy."

"Don't you dare touch me!" cried the bully, but there was a whine in
his tones.

"You let me alone or I'll tell my father!" added Sam.  "I--I didn't
have nothin' to do with it, anyhow.  I told Andy it would make trouble,
but he made me help him."

"Say, what's the matter with you?" demanded Andy indignantly of his
crony.  "Do you want to--"

"I wish I'd never come with you," went on Sam, who was beginning to be
frightened.

"Come now.  Start up that machine and haul the log out of the way,"
demanded Tom again.

"I won't do it!" retorted the red-haired lad impudently.

"Yes, you will," insisted our hero, and he took a step toward the
bully.  They were out of the clump of bushes now and in the roadside
ditch.  "You let me alone," almost screamed Andy, and in his baffled
rage he rushed at Tom, aiming a blow.

The young inventor quickly stepped to one side, and, as the bully
passed him, Tom sent out a neat left-hander.  Andy Foger went down in a
heap on the grass.




CHAPTER V

A TEST OF SPEED


Whether Tom or Andy was the most surprised at the happening would be
hard to say.  The former had not meant to hit so hard and he certainly
did not intend to knock the squint-eyed youth down.  The latter's fall
was due, as much as anything, to his senseless, rushing tactics and to
the fact that he slipped on the green grass.  The bully was up in a
moment, however, but he knew better than to try conclusions with Tom
again.  Instead he stood out of reach and spluttered:

"You just wait, Tom Swift! You just wait!"

"Well, I'm waiting," responded the other calmly.

"I'll get even with you," went on Andy.  "You think you're smart
because you got ahead of me, but I'll get square!"

"Look here!" burst out the young inventor determinedly, taking a step
toward his antagonist, at which Andy quickly retreated, "I don't want
any more of that talk from you, Andy Foger.  That's twice you've made
threats against me to-day.  You put that log across the road, and if
you try anything like it for your second attempt I'll make you wish you
hadn't.  That applies to you, too, Sam," he added, glancing at the
other lad.

"I--I ain't gone' to do nothin'," declared Sam.

"I told Andy not to put that tree--"

"Keep still, can't you!" shouted the bully.  "Come on.  We'll get even
with him, that's all," he muttered as he went back into the bushes
where the auto was.  Andy cranked up and he and his crony getting into
the car were about to start off.

"Hold on!" cried Tom.  "You'll take that log from across the road or
I'll have you arrested for obstructing traffic, and that's a serious
offense."

"I'm goin' to take it away!" growled Andy.  "Give a fellow a show can't
you?"

He cast an ugly look at Tom, but the latter only smiled.  It was no
easy task for Sam and Andy to pull the log out of the way, as they
could hardly lift it to slip the rope under.  But they finally managed
it, and, by the power of the car, hauled it to one side.  Then they
speed off.

"I 'clar t' gracious, dem young fellers am most as mean an' contrary as
mah mule Boomerang am sometimes," observed Eradicate.  "Only Boomerang
ain't quite so mean as dat."

"I should hope not, Rad," observed Tom.  "I'm ever so much obliged for
your warning.  I guess I'll be getting, home now.  Come around next
week; we have some work for you."

"'Deed an' I will," replied the colored man.  "I'll come around an'
eradicate all de dirt on yo' place, Mistah Swift.  Yais, sah, I's
Eradicate by name, and dat's my perfession--eradicatin' dirt.  Much
obleeged, I'll call around.  Giddap, Boomerang!"

The mule lazily flicked his ears, but did not stir, and Tom, knowing
the process of arousing the animal would take some time, hurried up the
hill to where he had left his motor-cycle.  Eradicate was still engaged
on the task of trying to arouse his steed to a sense of its duty when
the young inventor flashed by on his way home.

"So now you own a broken motor-boat," observed Mr. Swift when Tom had
related the circumstances of the auction.  "Well, now you have it, what
are you going to do with it?"

"Fix it, first of all," replied his son.  "It needs considerable
tinkering up, but nothing but what I can do, if you'll help me."

"Of course I will.  Do you think you can get any speed out of it?"

"Well, I'm not so anxious for speed.  I want a good, comfortable boat,
and the ARROW will be that.  I've named it, you see.  I'm going back to
Lanton this afternoon, take some tools along, and repair it so I can
run the boat over to here.  Then I'll get at it and fix it up.  I've
got a plan for you, dad."

"What is it?" asked the inventor, his rather tired face lighting up
with interest.

"I'm going to take you on a vacation trip."

"A vacation trip?"

"Yes, you need a rest.  You've been working too hard over that
gyroscope invention."

"Yes, Tom, I think I have," admitted Mr. Swift.  "But I am very much
interested in it, and I think I can get it to work.  If I do it will
make a great difference in the control of aeroplanes.  It will make
them more stable and able to fly in almost any wind.  But I certainly have
puzzled my brains over some features of it.  However, I don't quite see
what you mean."

"You need a rest, dad," said Mr. Swift's son kindly.  "I want you to
forget all about patents, invention, machinery and even the gyroscope
for a week or two.  When I get my motor-boat in shape I'm going to take
you and Ned Newton up the lake for a cruise.  We can camp out, or, if
we had to, we could sleep in the boat.  I'm going to put a canopy on it
and arrange some bunks.  It will do you good and perhaps new ideas for
your gyroscope may come to you after a rest."

"Perhaps they will, Tom.  I am certainly tired enough to need a
vacation.  It's very kind of you to think of me in connection with your
boat.  But if you're going to get it this afternoon you'd better start
if you expect to get back by night.  I think Mrs. Baggert has dinner
ready."

After the meal Tom selected a number of tools from his own particular
machine shop and carried them down to the dock on the lake, where his
two small boats were tied.

"Aren't you going back on your motor-cycle?" asked his father.

"No, Dad, I'm going to row over to Lanton, and, if I can get the ARROW
fixed, I'll tow my rowboat back."

"Very well, then you won't be in any danger from Andy Foger.  I must
speak to his father about him."

"No, dad, don't," exclaimed the young inventor quickly.  "I can fight
my own battles with Andy.  I don't fancy he will bother me again right
away."

Tom found it more of a task than he had anticipated to get the motor in
shape to run the ARROW back under her own power.  The magneto was out
of order and the batteries needed renewing, while the spark coil had
short-circuited and took considerable time to adjust.  But by using
some new dry cells, which Mr. Hastings gave him, and cutting out the
magneto, or small dynamo which produces the spark that exploded the
gasoline in the cylinders, Tom soon had a fine, "fat" hot spark from
the auxiliary ignition system.  Then, adjusting the timer and throttle
on the engine and seeing that the gasoline tank was filled, the lad
started up his motor.  Mr. Hastings helped him, but after a few turns
of the flywheel there were no explosions.  Finally, after the
carburetor (which is the device where gasoline is mixed with air to
produce an explosive mixture) had been adjusted, the motor started off
as if it had intended to do so all the while and was only taking its
time about it.

"The machine doesn't run as smooth as it ought to," commented Mr.
Hastings.  "No, it needs a thorough overhauling," agreed the owner of
the ARROW.  "I'll get at it to-morrow," and with that he swung out into
the lake, towing his rowboat after him.

"A motor-boat of my own!" exulted Tom as he twirled the steering wheel
and noted how readily the craft answered her helm.  "This is great!"

He steered down the lake and then, turning around, went up it a mile or
more before heading for his own dock, as he wanted to see how the
engine behaved.

"With some changes and adjustments I can make this a speedy boat,"
thought Tom.  "I'll get right at it.  I shouldn't wonder if I could
make a good showing against Mr. Hastings' new CARLOPA, though his
boat's got four cylinders and mine has but two."

The lad was proceeding leisurely along the lakeshore, near his home,
with the motor throttled down to test it at low speed, when he heard
some one shout.  Looking toward the bank, Tom saw a man waving his
hands.

"I wonder what he wants?" thought our hero as he put the wheel over to
send his craft to shore.  He heard a moment later, for the man on the
bank cried:

"I say, my young friend, do you know anything about automobiles?  Of
course you do or you wouldn't be running a motor-boat.  Bless my very
existence, but I'm in trouble!  My machine has stopped on a lonely road
and I can't seem to get it started.  I happened to hear your boat and I
came here to hail you.  Bless my coat-pockets but I am in trouble!  Can
you help me?  Bless my soul and gizzard!"

"Mr. Damon!" exclaimed Tom, shutting off the power, for he was now near
shore.  "Of course I'll help you, Mr. Damon," for the young inventor
had recognized the eccentric man of whom he had purchased the
motor-cycle and who had helped him in rounding up the thieves.

"Why, bless my shoe-laces, if it isn't Tom Swift!" exclaimed Mr. Damon,
who seemed very fond of calling down blessings upon himself or upon
articles of his dress or person.

"Yes! I'm here," admitted Tom with a laugh.

"And in a motor-boat, too! Bless my pocketbook, but did that run away
with some one who sold it to you cheap?"

"No, not exactly," and the lad explained how he had come into
possession of it.  By this time he was ashore and had tied the ARROW to
an overhanging tree.  Then Tom proceeded to where Mr. Damon had left
his stalled automobile.  The eccentric man was wealthy and his
physician had instructed him to ride about in the car for his health.
Tom soon located the trouble.  The carburetor had become clogged, and
it was soon in working order again.

"Well, now that you have a boat, I don't suppose you will be riding
about the country so much," commented Mr. Damon as he got into his car.
"Bless my spark-plug! But if you ever get over to Waterfield, where I
live, come and see me.  It's handy to get to by water."

"I'll come some day," promised the lad.

"Bless my hat band, but I hope so," went on the eccentric individual as
he prepared to start his car.

Tom completed the remainder of the trip to his house without incident
and his father came down to the dock to see the motor-boat.  He agreed
with his son that it was a bargain and that it could easily be put in
fine shape.

The youth spent all the next day and part of the following working on
the craft.  He overhauled the ignition system, which was the jump-spark
style, cleaned the magneto and adjusted the gasoline and compression
taps so that they fitted better.  Then he readjusted the rudder lines,
tightening them on the steering wheel, and looked over the piping from
the gasoline tank.

The tank was in the forward compartment, and, upon inspecting this, the
lad concluded to change the plan by which the big galvanized iron box
was held in place.  He took out the old wooden braces and set them
closer together, putting in a few new ones.

"The tank will not vibrate so when I'm going at full speed," he
explained to his father.

"Is that where the strange man was tampering with the lock the day of
the auction?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Yes, but I don't see what he could want in this compartment, do you
dad?"

The inventor got into the boat and looked carefully into the rather
dark space where the tank fitted.  He went over every inch of it, and,
pointing to one of the thick wooden blocks that supported the tank,
asked:

"Did you bore that hole in there, Tom?"

"No, it was there before I touched the braces.  But it isn't a hole, or
rather, someone bored it and stopped it up again.  It doesn't weaken
the brace any."

"No, I suppose not.  I was just wondering whether that was one of the
new blocks or an old one."

"Oh, an old one.  I'm going to paint them, too, so in case the water
leaks in or the gasoline leaks out the wood won't be affected.  A
gasoline tank should vibrate as little as possible, if you don't want
it to leak.  I guess I'll paint the whole interior of this compartment
white, then I can see away into the far corners of it."

"I think that's a good idea," commented Mr. Swift.

It was four days after his purchase of the boat before Tom was ready to
make a long trip in it.  Up to that time he had gone on short spins not
far from the dock, in order to test the engine adjustment.  The lad
found it was working very well, but he decided with a new kind of spark
plugs for the two cylinders that he could get more speed out of it.
Finally the forward compartment was painted and a general overhauling
given the hull and Tom was ready to put his boat to a good test.

"Come on, Ned," he said to his chum early one evening after Mr. Swift
had said he was too tired to go out on a trial run.  "We'll see what
the ARROW will do now."

From the time Tom started up the motor it was evident that the boat was
going through the water at a rapid rate.  For a mile or more the two
lads speeded along, enjoying it hugely.  Then Ned exclaimed:

"Something's coming behind us."

Tom turned his head and looked.  Then he called out:

"It's Mr. Hastings in his new CARLOPA.  I wonder if he wants a race?"

"Guess he'd have it all his own way," suggested Ned.

"Oh, I don't know.  I can get a little more speed out of my boat."

Tom waited until the former owner of the ARROW was up to him.

"Want a race?" asked Mr. Hastings good-naturedly.

"Sure!" agreed Tom, and he shoved the timer ahead to produce quicker
explosions.

The ARROW seemed to leap forward and for a moment was ahead of the
CARLOPA, but with a motion of his hand to the spark lever Mr. Hastings
also increased his speed.  For a moment the two boats were on even
terms and then the larger and newer one forged ahead.  Tom had expected
it, but he was a little disappointed.

"That's doing first rate," complimented Mr. Hastings as he passed them.
"Better than I was ever able to make her do even when she was new, Tom."

This made the present owner of the ARROW feel somewhat consoled.  He
and Ned ran on for a few miles, the CARLOPA in the meanwhile
disappearing from view around a bend.  Then Tom and his chum turned
around and made for the Swift dock.

"She certainly is a dandy!" declared Ned.  "I wish I had one like it."

"Oh, I intend that you shall have plenty of rides in this," went on his
friend.  "When you get your vacation, you and dad and I are going on a
tour," and he explained his plan, which, it is needless to say, met
with Ned's hearty approval.

Just before going to bed, some hours later, Tom decided to go down to
the dock to make sure he had shut off the gasoline cock leading from
the tank of his boat to the motor.  It was a calm, early summer night,
with a new moon giving a little light, and the lad went down to the
lake in his slippers.  As he neared the boathouse he heard a noise.

"Water rat," he murmured, "or maybe muskrats.  I must set some traps."

As Tom entered the boathouse he started back in alarm, for a bright
light flashed up, almost in his eyes.

"Who's here?" he cried, and at that moment someone sprang out of his
motor-boat, scrambled into a rowing craft which the youth could dimly
make out in front of the dock and began to pull away quickly.

"Hold on there!" cried the young inventor. "Who are you?  What do you
want?  Come back here!"

The person in the 'coat returned no answer.  With his heart doing beats
over-time Tom lighted a lantern and made a hasty examination of the
ARROW.  It did not appear to have been harmed, but a glance showed that
the door of the gasoline compartment had been unlocked and was open.
Tom jumped down into his craft.

"Some one has been at that compartment again!" he murmured.  "I wonder
if it was the same man who acted so suspiciously at the auction?  What
can his object be, anyhow?"

The next moment he uttered an exclamation of startled surprise and
picked up something from the bottom of the boat.  It was a bunch of
keys, with a tag attached, bearing the owner's name.

"Andy Foger!" murmured Tom.  "So this is, how he was trying to get
even!  Maybe he started to put a hole in the tank or in my boat."




CHAPTER VI

TOWING SOME GIRLS


With a sense of anger mingled with an apprehension lest some harm
should have been done to his craft, the owner of the ARROW went
carefully over it.  He could find nothing wrong.  The engine was all
right and all that appeared to have been accomplished by the unbidden
visitor was the opening of the locked forward compartment.  That this
had been done by one of the many keys on Andy Foger's ring was evident.

"Now what could have been his object?" mused Tom.  "I should think if
he wanted to put a hole in the boat he would have done it amidships,
where the water would have a better chance to come in, or perhaps he
wanted to flood it with gasoline and--"

The idea of fire was in Tom's mind, and he did not finish his
half-completed thought.

"That may have been it," he resumed after a hasty examination of the
gasoline tank, to make sure there were no leaks in it.  "To get even
with me for outbidding him on the boat, Andy may have wanted to destroy
the ARROW.  Well, of all the mean tricks, that's about the limit!  But
wait until I see him.  I've got evidence against him," and Tom looked
at the key ring.  "I could almost have him arrested for this."

Going outside the boathouse, Tom stood on the edge of the dock and
peered into the darkness.  He could hear the faint sound of someone
rowing across the lake, but there was no light.

"He had one of those electric flash lanterns," decided Tom.  "If I
hadn't found his keys, I might have thought it was Happy Harry instead
of Andy."

The young inventor went back into the house after carefully locking the
boat compartment and detaching from the engine an electrical device,
without which the motor in the ARROW could not be started.

"That will prevent them from running away with my boat, anyhow,"
decided Tom.  "And I'll tell Garret Jackson to keep a sharp watch
to-night." Jackson was the engineer at Mr. Swift's workshop.

Tom told his father of the happening and Mr. Swift was properly
indignant.  He wanted to go at once to see Mr. Foger and complain of
Andy's act, but Tom counseled waiting.

"I'll attend to Andy myself," said the young inventor.  "He's getting
desperate, I guess, or he wouldn't try to set the place on fire.  But
wait until I show him these keys."

Bright and early the next morning the owner of the motor-boat was down
to the dock inspecting it.  The engineer, who had been on watch part of
the night, reported that there had been no disturbance, and Tom found
everything all right.  "I wonder if I'd better go over and accuse Andy
now or wait until I see him and spring this evidence on him?" thought
our hero.  Then he decided it would be better to wait.  He took the
ARROW out after breakfast, his father going on a short spin with him.

"But I must go back now and work on my gyroscope invention," said Mr.
Swift when about two hours had been spent on the lake.  "I am making
good progress with it."

"You need a vacation," decided Tom, "I'll be ready to take you and Ned
in about two weeks.  He will have two weeks off then and, we'll have
some glorious times together."

That afternoon Tom put some new style spark plugs in the cylinders of
his motor and found that he had considerably increased the revolutions
of the engine, due to a better explosion being obtained.  He also made
some minor adjustments and the next day he went out alone for a long
run.

Heading up the lake, Tom was soon in sight of a popular excursion
resort that was frequently visited by church and Sunday-school
organizations in the vicinity of Shopton.  The lad saw a number of
rowing craft and a small motor-boat circling around opposite the resort
and remarked: "There must be a picnic at the grove to-day.  Guess I'll
run up and take a look."

The lad was soon in the midst of quite a flotilla of rowboats, most of
them manned by pretty girls or in charge of boys who were giving
sisters (their own or some other chap's) a trip on the water.  Tom
throttled his boat down to slow speed and looked with pleasure on the
pretty scene.  His boat attracted considerable attention, for motor
craft were not numerous on Lake Carlopa.

As our hero passed a boat, containing three very pretty young ladies,
Tom heard one of them exclaim:

"There he is now!  That's Tom Swift."

Something in the tones of the voice attracted his attention.  He turned
and saw a brown-eyed girl smiling at him.  She bowed and asked,
blushing the while:

"Well, have you caught any more runaway horses lately?"

"Runaway horses--why--what?  Oh, it's Miss Nestor!" exclaimed the lad,
recognizing the young lady whose steed he had frightened one day when
he was on his bicycle.  As told in the first volume of this series, the
horse had run away, being alarmed at the flashing of Tom's wheel, and
Miss Mary Nestor, of Mansburg, was in grave danger.

"So you've given up the bicycle for the motor-boat," went on the young
lady.

"Yes," replied Tom with a smile, shutting off the power, "and I haven't
had a chance to save any girls since I've had it."

The two boats had drifted close together, and Miss Nestor introduced
her two companions to Tom.

"Don't you want to come in and take a ride?" he asked.

"Is it safe?" asked Jennie Haddon, one of the trio.

"Of course it is, Jennie, or he wouldn't be out in it," said Miss
Nestor hastily.  "Come on, let's get in.  I'm just dying for a
motor-boat ride."

"What will we do with our boat?" asked Katie Carson.

"Oh, I can tow that," replied the youth.  "Get right in and I'll take
you all around the lake."

"Not too far," stipulated the girl who had figured in the runaway.  "We
must be back for lunch, which will be served in about an hour.  Our
church and Sunday-school are having a picnic."

"Maybe Mr. Swift will come and have some lunch with us," suggested Miss
Carson, blushing prettily.

"Nothing would give me greater pleasure," answered Tom, and then he
laughed at his formal reply, the girls joining in.

"We'd be glad to have you," added Miss Haddon.  "Oh!" she suddenly
screamed, "the boat's tipping over!"

"Oh, no," Tom hastened to assure her, coming, to the side to help her
in.  "It just tilts a bit, with the weight of so many on one side.  It
couldn't capsize if it tried."

In another moment the three were in the roomy cockpit and Tom had made
the empty rowboat fast to the stern.  He was about to start up when
from another boat, containing two little girls and two slightly larger
boys, came a plaintive cry:

"Oh, mister, give us a ride!"

"Sure!" agreed Tom pleasantly.  "Just fasten your boat to the other
rowboat and I'll tow you."

One of the boys did this, and then, with three pretty girls as his
companions in the ARROW and towing the two boats, Tom started off.

The girls were very much interested in the craft and asked all sorts of
questions about how the engine operated.  Tom explained as clearly as
he could how the gasoline exploded in the cylinders, about the electric
spark and about the propeller.  Then, when he had finished, Miss Haddon
remarked naively:

"Oh, Mr. Swift, you've explained it beautifully, and I'm sure if our
teacher in school made things as clear as you have that I could get
along fine.  I understand all about it, except I don't see what makes
the engine go."

"Oh," said Tom faintly, and he wondering what would be the best remark
to make under the circumstances, when Miss Nestor created a diversion
by looking at her watch and exclaiming:

"Oh, girls, it's lunch time!  We must go ashore.  Will you kindly put
about, Mr. Swift--I hope that is the proper term--and--land us--is that
right?" and she looked archly at Tom.

"That's perfectly right," he admitted with a laugh and a glance into
the girl's brown eyes.  "I'll put you ashore at once," and he headed
for a small dock.

"And come yourself to take lunch with us, added Miss Haddon.

"I'm afraid I might be in the way," stammered Tom.  "I--I have a pretty
good appetite, and--"

"I suppose you think that girls on a picnic don't take much lunch,"
finished Miss Nestor.  "But I assure you that we have plenty, and that
you will be very welcome," she added warmly.

"Yes, and I'd like to have him explain over again how the engine
works," went on Miss Haddon.  "I am so interested."

Tom helped the girls out, receiving their thanks as well as those of
the children in the second boat.  But as he walked with the young
ladies through the grove the young inventor registered a mental vow
that he would steer clear of explaining again how a gasoline engine
worked.

"Now come right over this way to our table," invited Miss Nestor.  "I
want you to meet papa and mamma."

Tom followed her.  As he stepped from behind a clump of trees he saw,
standing not far away, a figure that seemed strangely familiar.  A
moment later the figure turned and Tom saw Andy Foger confronting him.
At the sight of our hero the bully turned red and walked quickly away,
while Tom's fingers touched the ring of keys in his pocket.




CHAPTER VII

A BRUSH WITH ANDY


So unexpected was his encounter with Andy that the young inventor
hardly knew how to act, especially since he was a guest of the young
ladies.  Tom did not want to do or say anything to embarrass them or
make a scene, yet he did want to have a talk, and a very serious talk,
with Andy Foger.

Miss Nestor must have noticed Tom's sudden start at his glimpse of
Andy, for she asked: "Did you see some one you knew, Mr. Swift?"

"Yes," replied Tom, "I did--er--that is--" He paused in some confusion.

"Perhaps you'd like---that is prefer--to go with them instead of taking
lunch with girls who don't know anything about engines?" she persisted.

"Oh, no indeed," Tom hastened to assure her.  "He--that is--the person
I saw wouldn't care to have me lunch with him," and the youth smiled
grimly.

"Would you like to bring him over to our table?" inquired Miss Carson.
"We have plenty for him."

"No, I think that would hardly do," continued the lad, who tried not to
smile at the picture of the red-haired and squint-eyed Andy Foger
making one of a party with the girls.  The young ladies fortunately had
not noticed the bully, who was out of view by this time.

Tom was presented to Mr. and Mrs. Nestor, who told him how glad they
were to meet the young man who had been instrumental in saving their
daughter from injury, if not death.  Tom was a bit embarrassed, but
bore the praise as well as he could, and he was very glad when a
diversion, in the shape of lunch, occurred.

After a meal on tables under the trees in the grove Tom took the girls
and some of their friends out in his motor-boat again.  They covered
several miles around the lake before returning to the picnic ground.

As Tom was starting toward home in his boat, wondering what had become
of Andy and trying to think of a reason why the bully should attend
anything as "tame" as a church picnic, the object of his thoughts came
strolling through the trees down to the shore of the lake.  The moment
he saw Tom the red-haired lad started back, but the young inventor,
leaping out of his boat, called out:

"Hold on there, Andy Foger, I want to see you!" and there was menace in
Tom's tone.

"But, I don't want to see you!" retorted the other sulkily.  "I've got
no use for you."

"No more have I for you," was Tom's quick reply.  "But I want to return
you these keys.  You dropped them in my boat the other night when you
tried to set it afire.  If I ever catch you--"

"My keys!  Your boat!  On fire!" gasped Andy, so plainly astonished
that Tom knew his surprise was genuine.

"Yes, your keys.  You were a little too quick for me or I'd have
caught you at it.  The next time you pick a lock don't leave your keys
behind you," and he held out the jingling ring.

Andy Foger advanced slowly.  He took the bunch of keys and looked at
the tag.

"They are mine," he said slowly, as if there was some doubt about it.

"Of course they are," declared Tom.  "I found them where you dropped
them--in my boat."

"Do you mean over at the auction?"

"No, I mean down in my boathouse, where you sneaked in the other night
and tried to do some damage.

"The other night!" cried Andy.  "I never was near your boathouse any
night and I never lost my keys there!  I lost these the day of the
auction, on Mr. Hastings' ground, and I've been looking for them ever
since."

"Didn't you sneak in my boathouse the other night and try to do some
mischief?  Didn't you drop them then?"

"No, I didn't," retorted Andy earnestly.  "I lost those keys at the
auction, and I can prove it to you.  Look, I advertised for them in the
weekly Gazette."

The red-haired lad pulled a crumpled paper from his pocket and showed
Tom an advertisement offering a reward of two dollars for a bunch of
keys on a ring, supposed to have been lost at the auction on Mr.
Hastings' grounds in Lanton.  The finder was to return them to Andy
Foger.

"Does that look as if I lost the keys in your boathouse?" demanded the
bully sneeringly.  "I wouldn't have advertised them that way if I'd been
trying to keep my visit quiet.  Besides, I can prove that I was out of
town several nights.  I was over to an entertainment in Mansburg one
night and I didn't get home until two o'clock in the morning, because
my machine broke down.  Ask Ned Newton.  He saw me at the
entertainment."

Andy's manner was so earnest that Tom could not help believing him.
Then there was the evidence of the advertisement.  Clearly the
squint-eyed youth had not been the mysterious visitor to the boathouse
and had not unlocked the forward compartment.  But if it was not he,
who could it have been and how did the keys get there?  These were
questions which racked Tom's brain.

"You can ask Ned Newton," repeated Andy.  "He'll prove that I couldn't
have been near your place, if you don't believe me."

"Oh, I believe you all right," answered Tom, for there could be no
doubting Andy's manner, even though he and the young inventor were not
on good terms.  "But how did your keys get in my boat?"

"I don't know, unless you found them, kept them and dropped them
there," was the insolent answer.

"You know better than that," exclaimed Tom.

"Well, I owe you a reward of two dollars for giving them back to me,"
continued the bully patronizingly.  "Here it is," and he hauled out
some bills.

"I don't want your money!" fired back Tom.

"But I'd like to know who it was that was in my boat."

"And I'd like to know who it was took my keys," and Andy stuffed the
money back in his pocket.  Tom did not answer.  He was puzzling over a
queer matter and he wanted to be alone and think.  He turned aside from
the red-haired lad and walked toward his motor-boat.

"I'll give you a surprise in a few days," Andy called after him, but
Tom did not turn his head nor did he inquire what the surprise might be.

Mr. Swift was somewhat puzzled when his son related the outcome of the
key incident.  He agreed with Tom that some one might have found the
ring and kept it, and that the same person might have been the one whom
Tom had surprised in the boathouse.

"But it's idle to speculate on it," commented the inventor.  "Andy
might have induced some of his chums to act for him in harming your
boat, and the key advertisement might have been only a ruse."

"I hardly think so," answered his son, shaking his head.  "It strikes
me as being very curious, and I'm going to see if I can't get at the
bottom of it."

But a week or more passed and Tom had no clew.  In the meanwhile he was
working away at his motor-boat, installing several improvements.

One of these was a better pump, which circulated the water around the
cylinders, and another was a new system of lubrication under forced
feed.

"This ought to give me a little more speed," reasoned Tom, who was not
yet satisfied with his craft.  "Guess I'll take it out for a spin."

He was alone in the ARROW, taking a long course up the lake when, as he
passed a wooded point that concealed from view a sort of bay, he heard
the puffing of another motor-boat.

"Maybe that's Mr. Hastings," thought Tom.  "If I raced with him now, I
think the ARROW could give a better account of herself."

The young inventor looked at the boat as it came into view.  It needed
but a glance to show that it was not the CARLOPA.  Then, as it came
nearer, Tom saw a familiar figure in it--a red-haired, squint-eyed chap.

"Andy Foger!" exclaimed Tom.  "He's got a motor-boat!  This is the
surprise he spoke of."

The boat was rapidly approaching him, and he saw that it was painted a
vivid red.  Then he could make out the name on the bow, RED STREAK.
Andy was sending the craft toward him at a fast rate.

"You needn't think you're the only one on this lake who has a gasoline
boat!" called Andy boastfully.  "This is my new one and the fastest
thing afloat around here.  I can go all around you.  Do you want to
race?"

It was a "dare," and Tom never took such things when he could
reasonably enter a contest.  He swung his boat around so as to shoot
alongside of Andy and answered:

"Yes, I'll race you.  Where to?"

"Down opposite Kolb's dock and back to this point," was the answer.
"I'll give you a start, as my engine has three cylinders.  This is a
racing boat."

"I don't need any start," declared Tom.  "I'll race you on even terms.
Go ahead!"

Both lads adjusted their timers to get more speed.  The water began to
curl away from the sharp prows, the motors exploded faster and faster.
The race was on between the ARROW and the RED STREAK.




CHAPTER VIII

OFF ON A TRIP


Glancing with critical eyes at the craft of his rival, Tom saw that
Andy Foger had a very fine boat.  The young inventor also realized that
if he was to come anywhere near winning the race he would have to get
the utmost speed out of his engine, for the new boat the bully had was
designed primarily for racing, while Tom's was an all-around pleasure
craft, though capable of something in the speed line.

"I'll be giving you a tow in a few minutes, as soon as my engine gets
warmed up!" sneered Andy.

"Maybe," said Tom, and then he crouched down to make as little
resistance as possible to the wind.  Andy, on the contrary, sat boldly
upright at the auto steering wheel of his boat.

On rushed the two motor craft, their prows exactly even and the
propellers tossing up a bulge in the water at their sterns.  Rapidly
acquiring speed after the two lads had adjusted the timers on their
motors, the boats were racing side by side, seemingly on even terms.

The RED STREAK had a very sharp prow, designed to cut through the
water. It was of the type known as an automobile launch.  That is, the
engine was located forward, under a sort of hood, which had two hinged
covers like a bat's wings. The steering-wheel shaft went through the
forward bulkhead, slantingly, like the wheel of an auto, and was
arranged with gasoline and sparking levers on the center post in a
similar manner. At the right of the wheel was a reversing lever, by
which the propeller blades could be set at neutral, or arranged so as
to drive the boat backward. Altogether the RED STREAK was a very fine
boat and had cost considerably more than had Tom's, even when the
latter was new. All these things the young owner of the ARROW thought
of as he steered his craft over the course.

"I hardly think I can win," Tom remarked to himself in a whisper.  "His
boat is too speedy for this one.  I have a chance, though, for his
engine is new, and I don't believe he understands it as well as I do
mine.  Then, too, I am sure I have a better ignition system."

But if Tom had any immediate hopes of defeating Andy, they were doomed
to disappointment, for about two minutes after the race started the RED
STREAK forged slowly ahead.

"Come on!" cried the red-haired lad.  "I thought you wanted a race."

"I do," answered the young inventor.  "We're a long way from the dock
yet, and we've got to come back."

"You'll be out of it by the time I get to the dock," declared Andy.

Indeed it began to look so, for the auto boat was now a full length
ahead of Tom's craft and there was open water between them.  But our
hero knew a thing or two about racing, though he had not long been a
motor-boat owner.  He adjusted the automatic oiler on the cylinders to
give more lubrication, as he intended to get more speed out of his
engine.  Then he opened the gasoline cock a trifle more and set his
timer forward a few notches to get an earlier spark.  He was not going
to use the maximum speed just yet, but he first wanted to see how the
motor of the ARROW would behave under these conditions.  To his delight
he saw his boat slowly creeping up on Andy's.  The latter, with a
glance over his shoulder, saw it too, and he advanced his spark.  His
craft forged ahead, but the rate of increase was not equal to Tom's.
"If I can keep up to him I suppose I ought to be glad," thought the
young inventor, "for his boat is away ahead of mine in rating."

Through the water the sharp bows cut.  There were only a few witnesses
to the race, but those who were out in boats saw a pretty sight as the
two speedy craft came on toward the dock, which was the turning point.

Andy's boat reached it first, and swung about in a wide circle for the
return.  Tom decided it was time to make his boat do its best, so he
set the timer at the limit, and the spark, coming more quickly,
increased the explosions.

Up shot the ARROW and, straightening out after the turn, Tom's craft
crept along until it lapped the stern of the RED STREAK.  Andy looked
back in dismay.  Then he tried to get more speed out of his engine.  He
did cause the screw to revolve a little faster, and Tom noted that he
was again being left behind.  Then one of those things, which may
happen at any time to a gasoline motor, happened to Andy's.  It began
to miss explosions.  At first it was only occasionally, then the misses
became more frequent.

The owner of the RED STREAK with one hand on the steering wheel, tried
with the other to adjust the motor to get rid of the trouble, but he
only made it worse.  Andy's boat began to fall back and Tom's to creep
up.  Frantically Andy worked the gasoline and sparking levers, but
without avail.  At last one cylinder went completely out of service.

The two boats were now on even terms and were racing along side by side
toward the wooded, point, which marked the finish.

"I'll beat you yet!" exclaimed Andy fiercely.

"Better hurry up!" retorted Tom.

But the young inventor was not to have it all his own way.  With a
freakishness equal to that with which it had ceased to explode the dead
cylinder came to life again, and the RED STREAK shot ahead.  Once more
Andy's boat had the lead of a length and the finish of the race was
close at hand.  The squint-eyed lad turned and shouted: "I told you I'd
beat you!  Want a tow now?"

It began to look as though Tom would need it, but he still had
something in reserve.  One of the improvements he had put in the ARROW
was a new auxiliary ignition system.  This he now decided to use.

With a quick motion Tom threw over the switch that put it into
operation.  A hotter, "fatter" spark was at once produced, and
adjusting his gasoline cock so that a little more of the fluid would be
drawn in, making a "richer" mixture, the owner of the ARROW saw the
craft shoot forward as if, like some weary runner, new life had been
infused.

In vain did Andy frantically try to get more speed out of his motor.
He cut out the muffler, and the explosions sounded loudly over the
lake.  But it was no use.  A minute later the ARROW, which had slowly
forged ahead, crossed the bows of the RED STREAK opposite the finishing
point, and Tom had won the race.

"Well, was that fair?" our hero called to Andy, who had quickly shut
off some of his power as he saw his rival's daring trick.  "Did I beat
you fair?"

"You wouldn't have beaten me if my engine hadn't gone back on me,"
grumbled Andy, chagrin showing on his face.  "Wait until my motor runs
smoother and I'll give you a big handicap and beat you.  My boat's
faster than yours.  It ought to be.  It cost fifteen hundred dollars
and it's a racer."

"I guess it doesn't like racing," commented Tom as he swung the prow of
his craft down the lake toward his home.  But he knew there was some
truth in what Andy had said.  The RED STREAK was a more speedy boat,
and, with proper handling, could have beaten the ARROW.  That was where
Tom's superior knowledge came in useful.  "Just you wait, I'll beat you
yet," called Andy, after the young inventor, but the latter made no
answer.  He was satisfied.

Mr. Swift was much interested that night in his son's account of the
race.

"I had no idea yours was such a speedy boat," he said.

"Well, it wasn't originally," admitted Tom, "but the improvements I put
on it made it so.  But, dad, when are we going on our tour?  You look
more worn out than I've seen you in some time, not excepting when the
turbine model was stolen.  Are you worrying over your gyroscope
invention?"

"Somewhat, Tom.  I can't seem to hit on just what I want.  It's a
difficult problem."

"Then I tell you what let's do, dad.  Let's drop everything in the
inventive line and go off on a vacation.  I'll take you up the lake in
my boat and you can spend a week at the Lakeview Hotel at Sandport.  It
will do you good."

"What will you do, Tom?"

"Oh, Ned Newton and I will cruise about and we'll take you along any
time you want to go.  We're going to camp out nights or sleep in the
boat if it rains.  I've ordered a canopy with side curtains.  Ned and I
don't care for the hotel life in the summer.  Will you go?"

Mr. Swift considered a moment.  He did need a rest, for he had been
working hard and his brain was weary with thinking of many problems.
His son's program sounded very attractive.

"I think I will accept," said the inventor with a smile.  "When can you
start, Tom?"

"In about four days.  Ned Newton will get his vacation then and I'll
have the canopy on.  I'll start to work at it to-morrow.  Then we'll go
on a trip."

Sandport was a summer resort at the extreme southern end of Lake
Carlopa, and Mr. Swift at once wrote to the Lakeview Hotel there to
engage a room for himself.  In the meanwhile Tom began to put the
canopy on his boat and arrange for the trip, which would take nearly a
whole day.  Ned Newton was delighted with the prospect of a camping
tour and helped Tom to get ready.  They took a small tent and plenty of
supplies, with some food.  They did not need to carry many rations, as
the shores of the lake were lined with towns and villages where food
could be procured.

Finally all was ready for the trip and the night before the start Ned
Newton stayed at Tom's house so as to be in readiness for going off
early in the morning.  The day was all that could be desired, Tom
noted, as he and his chum hurried down to the dock before breakfast to
put their blankets in the boat.  As the young inventor entered the
craft he uttered an exclamation.

"What's the matter?" asked Ned.

"I was sure I locked the sliding door of that forward compartment," was
the reply.  "Now it's open."  He looked inside the space occupied by
the gasoline tank and cried out:  "One of the braces is gone!  There's
been some one at my boat in the night and they tried to damage her."

"Much harm done?" asked Ned anxiously.

"No, none at all, to speak of," replied Tom.  "I can easily put a new
block under the tank.  In fact, I don't really need all I have.  But
why should any one take one out, and who did it?  That's what I want to
know."

The two lads looked carefully about the dock and boat for a sign of the
missing block or any clews that might show who had been tampering with
the ARROW, but they could find nothing.

"Maybe the block fell out," suggested Ned.

"It couldn't," replied Tom.  "It was one of the new ones I put in
myself and it was nailed fast.  You can see where it's been pried
loose.  I can't understand it," and Tom thought rapidly of several
mysterious occurrences of late in which the strange man at the auction
and the person he had surprised one night in the boathouse had a part.

"Well, it needn't delay our trip," resumed the young inventor.  "Maybe
there's a hoodoo around here, and it will do us good to get away a few
days.  Come on, we'll have breakfast, get dad and start."

A little later the ARROW was puffing away up the lake in the direction
of Sandport.




CHAPTER IX

MR. SWIFT IS ALARMED


"Don't you feel better already, dad?" asked Tom that noon as they
stopped under a leaning, overhanging tree for lunch on the shore of the
lake.  "I'll leave it to Ned if you don't look more contented and less
worried."

"I believe he does," agreed the other lad.  "Well, I must say I
certainly have enjoyed the outing so far," admitted the inventor with a
smile.  "And I haven't been bothering about my gyroscope.  I think I'll
take another sandwich, Tom, and a few more olives."

"That's the way to talk!" cried the son.  "Your appetite is improving,
too.  If Mrs. Baggert could see you she'd say so."

"Oh, yes, Mrs. Baggert.  I do hope she and Garret will look after the
house and shops well," said Mr. Swift, and the old, worried look came
like a shadow over his face.

"Now don't be thinking of that, dad," advised Tom, "Of course
everything will be all right.  Do you think some of those model thieves
will return and try to get some of your other inventions?"

"I don't know, Tom.  Those men were unscrupulous scoundrels, and you
can never tell what they might do to revenge themselves on us for
defeating their plans."

"Well, I guess Garret and Mrs. Baggert will look out for them,"
remarked his son.  "Don't worry."

"Yes, it's bad for the digestion," added Ned.  "If you don't mind, Tom,
I'll have some more coffee and another sandwich myself."

"Nothing the matter with your appetite, either," commented the young
inventor as he passed the coffee pot and the plate.

They were soon on their way again, the ARROW making good time up the
lake.  Tom was at the engine, making several minor adjustments to it,
while Ned steered.  Mr. Swift reclined on one of the cushioned seats
under the shade of the canopy.  The young owner of the ARROW looked
over the stretch of water from time to time for a possible sight of
Andy Foger, but the RED STREAK was not to be seen.  The Lakeview Hotel
was reached late that afternoon and the boat was tied up to the dock,
while Tom and Ned accompanied Mr. Swift to see him comfortably
established in his room.

"Won't you stay to supper with me?" invited the inventor to his son and
the latter's chum.  "Or do you want to start right in on camp life?"

"I guess we'll stay to supper and remain at the hotel to-night,"
decided Tom.  "We got here a little later than I expected, and Ned and
I hardly have time to go very far and establish a temporary camp.
We'll live a life of luxurious ease to-night and begin to be
'wanderlusters' and get back to nature to-morrow."

In the morning Tom and his chum, full of enthusiasm for the pleasures
before them, started off, promising to come back to the hotel in a few
days to see how Mr. Swift felt.  The trip had already done the man good
and his face wore a brighter look.

Tom and Ned, in the speedy ARROW, cruised along the lakeshores all that
morning.  At noon they went ashore, made a temporary camp and arranged
to spend the night there in the tent.  After this was erected they got
out their fishing tackle and passed the afternoon at that sport, having
such good luck that they provided their own supper without having to
depend on canned stuff.

They lived this life for three days, making a new camp each night,
being favored with good weather, so that they did not have to sleep in
the boat to keep dry.  On the afternoon of the third day Tom, with a
critical glance at the sky, remarked:

"I shouldn't be surprised if it rained to-morrow, Ned."

"Me either.  It does look sort of hazy, and the wind is in a bad
quarter."

"Then what do you say to heading for the hotel? I fancy dad will be glad
to see us."

"That suits me. We can start camp life again after the storm passes."

They started for Sandport that afternoon.  When within about two miles
of the hotel dock Tom saw, just ahead of them, a small motor-boat.  Ned
observed it too and called out:

"S'pose that's Andy looking for another race?"

"No, the boat's too small for his.  We'll put over that way and see who
it is."

The other craft did not appear to be moving very rapidly and the ARROW
was soon overhauling it.  As the two chums came nearer they could hear
the puffing of the motor.  Tom listened with critical ears.

"That machine isn't working right," he remarked to his chum.

At that moment there sounded a loud explosion from the other boat and
at the same time there came over the water a shrill cry of alarm.
"That's a girl in that boat!" exclaimed Ned.  "Maybe she's hurt."

"No, the motor only backfired," observed Tom.  "But we'll go over and
see if we can help her.  Perhaps she doesn't understand it.  Girls
don't know much about machinery."

A little later the ARROW shot up alongside the other craft, which had
come to a stop.  The two lads could see a girl bending over the motor,
twirling the flywheel and trying to get it started.  "Can I help you?"
asked Tom, shutting off the power from his craft.

The young lady glanced up.  Her face was red and she seemed ill at
ease.  At the sight of the young inventor she uttered an exclamation of
relief.

"Why, Mr. Swift!" she cried.  "Oh, I'm in such trouble.  I can't make
the machine work, and I'm afraid it's broken; it exploded."

"Miss Nestor!" blurted out Tom, more surprised evidently to see his
acquaintance of the runaway again than she was at beholding him.  "I
didn't know you ran a motor-boat," he added.  "I don't," said she
simply and helplessly.  "That's the trouble, it won't run."

"How comes it that you are up here?" went on Tom.

"I am stopping with friends, who have a cottage near the Lakeview
Hotel.  They have a motor-boat and I got Dick Blythe--he's the owner of
this--to show me how to run it.  I thought I knew, and I started out a
little while ago.  At first it went beautifully, but a few minutes ago
it blew up, or--or something dreadful happened."

"Nothing very dreadful, I guess," Tom assured her.  "I think I can fix
it."  He got into the other boat and soon saw what the trouble was.
The carburetor had gotten out of adjustment and the gasoline was not
feeding properly.  The young inventor soon had it in order, and,
testing the motor, found that it worked perfectly.

"Oh, I can't thank you enough," cried Miss Nestor with a flash from her
brown eyes that made Tom's heart beat double time.  "I was afraid I had
damaged the boat, and I knew Dick, who is a sort of second cousin of
mine, would never forgive me."

"There's no harm done," Tom assured her.  "But you had better keep near
us on your way back, that is, if you are going back."

"Oh, indeed I am.  I was frightened when I found I'd come so far away
from shore, and then, when that explosion took place--well, you can
imagine how I felt.  Indeed I will keep near you.  Are you stopping
near here?  If you are, I wish you'd come and see me, you and Mr.
Newton," she added, for Tom had introduced his chum.

"I'll be very glad to," answered our hero, and he told how he happened
to be in the neighborhood.  "I'll give you a few lessons in managing a
boat, if you like," he added.

"Oh, will you?  That will be lovely!  I won't tell Dick about it, and
I'll surprise him some day by showing him how well I can run his boat."

"Good idea," commented Tom.

He started the motor for Miss Nestor, having stopped it after his first
test, and then, with the DOT, which was the name of the small boat Miss
Nestor was in, following the larger ARROW, the run back to the hotel
was made.  The young lady turned off near the Lakeview dock to go to
the cottage where she was stopping and the lads tied up at the hotel
boathouse.

"Yes, we are in for a storm," remarked Tom as he and his chum walked up
toward the hotel.  "I wonder how dad is?  I hope the outing is doing
him good."

"There he comes now," observed Ned, and, looking up, Tom saw his father
approaching.  The young inventor was at once struck by the expression
on his parent's face.  Mr. Swift looked worried and Tom anxiously
hastened forward to meet him.

"What's the matter dad?" he asked as cheerfully as he could.  "Have you
been figuring over that gyroscope problem again, against my express
orders?" and he laughed a little.

"No, Tom, it's not the gyroscope that's worrying me."

"What is it then?"

"Those scoundrels are around again, Tom!" and Mr. Swift looked
apprehensively about him.

"You mean the men who stole the turbine model?"

"Yes.  I was walking in the woods near the hotel yesterday and I saw
Anson Morse.  He did not see me, for I turned aside as quickly as I had
a glimpse of him.  He was talking to another man."

"What sort of a man?"

"Well, an ordinary enough individual, but I noticed that he had
tattooed on the little finger of his left hand a blue ring."

"Happy Harry, the tramp!" exclaimed Tom.  "What can he and Morse be
doing here?"

"I don't know, Tom, but I'm worried.  I wish I was back home.  I'm
afraid something may happen to some of my inventions.  I want to go
back to Shopton, Tom."

"Nonsense, dad.  Don't worry just because you saw some of your former
enemies.  Everything is all right at home.  Mrs. Baggert and Garret
Jackson will look after things.  But, if you like, I, can find out for
you how matters are."

"How, Tom?"

"By taking a run down there in my motor-boat.  I can do it to-morrow
and get back by night, if I start early.  Then you will not worry."

"All right, Tom; I wish you would.  Come up to my room and we will talk
it over.  I'd rather leave you go than telephone, as I don't like to
talk of my business over the wire if I can avoid it."




CHAPTER X

A CRY FOR HELP


"Now, dad, tell me all about it," requested Tom when he and Ned were in
Mr. Swift's apartment at the hotel, safe from the rain that was
falling.  "How did you happen to see Anson Morse and Happy Harry?" My
old readers will doubtless remember that the latter was the disguised
tramp who was so vindictive toward Tom, while Morse was the man who
endeavored to sneak in Mr. Swift's shop and steal a valuable invention.

"Well, Tom," proceeded the inventor, "there isn't much to tell.  I was
out walking in the woods yesterday, and when I was behind a clump of
bushes I heard voices.  I looked out and there I saw the two men."

"At first I thought they were trailing me, but I saw that they had not
seen me, and I didn't see how they could know I was in the
neighborhood.  So I quietly made my way back to the hotel."

"Could you hear what they were saying?"

"Not all, but they seemed angry over something.  The man with the blue
ring on his finger asked the other man whether Murdock had been heard
from."

"Who is Murdock?"

"I don't know, unless he is another member of the gang or unless that
is an assumed name."

"It may be that.  What else did you hear?"

"The man we know as Morse replied that he hadn't heard from him, but
that he suspected Murdock was playing a double game.  Then the
tramp--Happy Harry--asked this question: 'Have you any clew to the
sparkler?' And Morse answered: 'No, but I think Murdock has hid it
somewhere and is trying to get away with it without giving us our
share.' Then the two men walked away, and I came back to the hotel,"
finished Mr. Swift.

"Sparkler," murmured Tom.  "I wonder what that can be?"

"That's a slang word for diamonds," suggested Ned.

"So it is.  In that case, dad, I think we have nothing to worry about.
Those fellows must be going to commit a diamond robbery or perhaps it
has already taken place."

The inventor seemed relieved at this theory of his son.  His face
brightened and he said: "If they are going to commit a robbery, Tom, we
ought to notify the police."

"But if they said that 'Murdock,' whoever he is, had the sparkler and
was trying to get away with it without giving them their share,
wouldn't that indicate that the robbery had already taken place?" asked
Ned.

"That's so," agreed Tom.  "But it won't do any harm to tell the hotel
detective that suspicious characters are around, no matter if the robbery
has been committed.  Then he can be on the lookout.  But I don't think we
have anything to worry about, dad.  Still, if you like, I'll take a run
down to the house to see that everything is all right, though I'm sure
it will be found that we have nothing to be alarmed over."

"Well, I will be more relieved if you do," said the inventor, "However,
suppose we have a good supper now and you boys can stay at the hotel
to-night.  Then you and Ned can start off early in the morning."

"All right," agreed Tom, but there was a thoughtful look on his face
and he appeared to be planning something that needed careful attention
to details.

After supper that night Tom took his chum to one side and asked: "Would
you mind very much if you didn't make the trip to Shopton with me?"

"No, Tom, of course not, if it will help you any.  Do you want me to
stay here?"

"I think it will be a good plan.  I don't like to leave dad alone if
those scoundrels are around.  Of course he's able to look after
himself, but sometimes he gets absent minded from thinking too much
about his inventions."

"Of course I'll stay here at the hotel.  This is just as good a
vacation as I could wish."

"Oh, I don't mean all the while.  Just a day or so--until I come back.
I may be here again by to-morrow night and find that my father is
needlessly alarmed.  Then something may have happened at home and I
would be delayed.  If I should be, I'd feel better to know that you
were here."

"Then I'll stay, and if I see any of those men--"

"You'd better steer clear of them," advised Tom quickly.  "They are
dangerous customers."

"All right.  Then I'll go over and give Miss Nestor lessons on how to
run a motor-boat," was the smiling response.  "I fancy, with what she
and I know, we can make out pretty well."

"Hold on there!" cried Tom gaily.  "No trespassing, you know."

"Oh, I'll just say I'm your agent," promised Ned with a grin.  "You
can't object to that."

"No, I s'pose not.  Well, do the best you can.  She is certainly a nice
girl."

"Yes, but you do seem to turn up at most opportune times.  Luck is
certainly with you where she is concerned.  First you save her in a
runaway--"

"After I start the runaway," interrupted Tom.

"Then you take her for a ride in your motor-boat, and, lastly, you come
to her relief when she is stalled in the middle of the lake.  Oh you
certainly are a lucky dog!"

"Never mind, I'm giving you a show.  Now let's get to bed early, as I
want to get a good start."

Tom awoke to find a nasty, drizzling rainstorm in progress, and the
lake was almost hidden from view by a swirling fog.  Still he was not
to be daunted from his trip to Shopton by the weather, and, after a
substantial breakfast, he bade his father and Ned good-by and started
off in the ARROW.

The canopy he had provided was an efficient protection against the
rain, a celluloid window in the forward hanging curtains affording him
a view so that he could steer.

Through the mist puffed the boat, the motor being throttled down to
medium speed, for Tom was not as familiar with the lake as he would
like to have been, and he did not want to run aground or into another
craft.

He was thinking over what his father had told him about the presence of
the men and vainly wondering what might be their reference to the
"sparkler."  His thoughts also dwelt on the curious removal of the
bracing block from under the gasoline tank of his boat.

"I shouldn't be surprised but what Andy Foger did that," he mused.
"Some day he and I will have a grand fight, and then maybe he'll let me
alone.  Well, I've got other things to think about now.  The hotel
detective can keep a lookout for the men around the hotel, after the
warning I gave him, and I'll see that all is right at home."

The fog lifted somewhat and Tom put on more speed.  As he was steering
the boat along near shore he heard, off to the woods at his right, the
report of a gun.  It came so suddenly that he jumped involuntarily.  A
moment later there sounded, plainly through the damp air, a cry for
help.

"Some one's hurt--shot!" cried the youth aloud.

He turned the boat in toward the bank.  As he shut off the power from
the motor he heard the cry again:

"Help! Help!  Help!"

"I must go ashore!" he exclaimed.  "Probably some one is badly wounded
by a gun."

He paused for a moment as the fear came to him that it might be some of
the patent thieves.  Then, dismissing that idea as the ARROW's prow
touched the gravel, Tom sprang out, drew the boat up a little way,
fastened the rope to a tree and hurried off into the dripping woods in
the direction of the voice that was calling for aid.




CHAPTER XI

A QUICK RUN


"Where are you?"  cried Tom.  "Are you hurt?  Where are you?"

Uttering these words after he had hurried into the woods a short
distance, the young inventor paused for an answer.  At first he could
hear nothing but the drip of water from the branches of the trees;
then, as he listened intently, he became aware of a groan not far away.

"Where are you?"  cried the lad again.  "I've come to help you.  Where
are you?"

He had lost what little fear he had had at first, that it might be one
of the unscrupulous gang, and came to the conclusion that he might
safely offer to help.

Once more the groan sounded and it was followed by a faint voice
speaking:

"Here I am, under the big oak tree.  Oh, whoever you are, help me
quickly!  I'm bleeding to death!"

With the sound of the voice to guide him, Tom swung around.  The appeal
had come from the left and, looking in that direction, he saw, through
the mist, a large oak tree.  Leaping over the underbrush toward it he
caught sight of the wounded man at its foot.  Beside him lay a gun and
there was a wound in the man's right arm.

"Who shot you?"  cried Tom, hurrying to the side of the man.  "Was it
some of those patent thieves?"  Then, realizing that a stranger would
know nothing of the men who had stolen the model, Tom prepared to
change the form of his question.  But, before he had an opportunity to
do this, the man, whose eyes were closed, opened them, and, as he got a
better sight of his face, Tom uttered a cry.

"Why, it's Mr. Duncan!"  exclaimed the lad.  He had recognized the rich
hunter, whom he had first met in the woods that spring shortly after
Happy Harry, the tramp, had disabled Tom's motor-cycle.  "Mr. Duncan,"
the young inventor repeated, "how did you get shot?"

"Is that you, Tom Swift?"  asked the gunner.  "Help me, please.  I must
stop this bleeding in my arm.  I'll tell you about it afterward.  Wind
something around it tight--your handkerchief will do."

The man sighed weakly and his eyes closed again.  The lad saw the blood
spurting from an ugly wound.

"I must make a tourniquet," the youth exclaimed.  "That will check the
bleeding until I can get him to a doctor."

With Tom to think was to act.  He took out his knife and cut off Mr.
Duncan's sleeves below the injury, slashing through coat and shirts.
Then he saw that part of a charge of shot had torn away some of the
large muscular development of the upper arm.  The hunter seemed to have
fainted and the youth worked quickly.  Tying his handkerchief above the
wound and inserting a small stone under the cloth, so that the pebble
would press on the main artery, Tom put a stick in the handkerchief and
began to twist it.  This had the effect of tightening the linen around
the arm, and in a few seconds the lad was glad to see that the blood
had stopped spurting out with every beat of the heart.  Giving the
tourniquet a few more twists to completely stop the flow of blood, Tom
fastened the stick-lever in place by a bit of string.

"That's--that's better," murmured Mr. Duncan.  "Now if you can go for a
doctor--"  He had to pause for breath.

"I'll not leave you here alone while I go for a doctor," declared Tom.
"I have my motor-boat on the lake.  Do you think I could get you down
to it and take you home?"

"Perhaps--maybe.  I'll be stronger in a moment, now that the bleeding
has stopped.  But not--not home--frighten my wife.  Take me to the
sanitarium if you can--sanitarium up the lake, a few miles from here."

The unfortunate man, who had tried to sit upright, had to lean back
against the tree again.  Tom understood what he meant in spite of the
broken sentences.  Mr. Duncan did not want to be taken home in the
condition he was then in, for fear of alarming his wife.  He wanted to
be taken to the sanitarium, and Tom knew where this was, a well-known
resort for the treatment of various diseases and surgical cases.  It
was about five miles away and on the opposite shore of the lake.

"Water--a drink!"  murmured Mr. Duncan.

Seeing that his patient would be all right, for a few minutes at least,
Tom hurried to his motor-boat, got a cup and, filling it with water
from a jug he carried, he hastened with it to the hunter.  The fluid
revived the man wonderfully and now that the bleeding had almost
completely stopped, Mr. Duncan was much stronger.

"Do you think you can get to the boat, if I help you?"  asked Tom.

"Yes, I believe so.  To think of meeting you again, and under such
circumstances!  It is providential."

"Did someone shoot you?"  inquired Tom, who could not get out of his
head the notion of the men who had once assaulted him.

"No, I shot myself," answered Mr. Duncan as he got to his feet with
Tom's help.  "I was out with my gun, practicing just as I was that day
when I met you in the woods.  I stooped down to crawl under a bush and
the weapon went off, the muzzle being close against my arm.  I can't
understand how it happened.  I fell down and called for help.  Then I
guess I must have fainted, but I came to when I heard you talking to
me.  I shouldn't have come out to-day as it is so wet, but I had some
new shot shells I wished to try in order to test them before the
hunting season.  But if I can get to the sanitarium, I will be well
taken care of.  I know one of the doctors there."

With Tom leading him and acting as a sort of support, the journey to
the motor-boat was slowly made.  Making as comfortable a bed as
possible out of the seat cushions, Tom assisted Mr. Duncan to it, and
then starting the engine he sent his boat out from shore at half speed,
as the fog was still thick and he did not want to run upon a rock.

"Do you know where the sanitarium is?"  asked the wounded hunter.

"About," answered Tom a little doubtfully, "but I'm afraid it's going
to be hard to locate it in this fog."

"There's a compass in my coat pocket," said Mr. Duncan.  "Take it out
and I'll tell you how to steer.  You ought to carry a compass if you're
going to be a sailor."

Tom was beginning to think so himself and wondered that he had not
thought of it before.  He found the one the hunter had, and placing it
on the seat near him, he carefully listened to the wounded man's
directions.  Tom easily comprehended and soon had the boat headed in
the proper direction.  After that it was comparatively easy to keep on
the right course, even in the fog.

But there was another danger, however, and this was that he might run
into another boat.  True, there were not many on Lake Carlopa, but
there were some, and one of the few motor-boats might be out in spite
of the bad weather.

"Guess I'll not run at full speed," decided Tom.  "I wouldn't like to
crash into the RED STREAK.  We'd both sink."

So he did not run his motor at the limit and sat at the steering-wheel,
peering ahead into the fog for the first sight of another craft.

He turned to look at Mr. Duncan and was alarmed at the pallor of his
face.  The man's eyes were closed and he was breathing in a peculiar
manner.

"Mr. Duncan," cried Tom, "are you worse?"

There was no answer.  Leaving the helm for a moment, Tom bent over the
injured hunter.  A glance showed him what had happened.  The tourniquet
had slipped and the wound was bleeding again.  Tom quickly shut off the
motor, so that he might give his whole attention to the work of
tightening the handkerchief.  But something seemed to be wrong.  No
matter how tightly he twisted the stick the blood did not stop flowing.
The lad was frightened.  In a short time the man would bleed to death.

"I've got to get him to the sanitarium in record time!"  exclaimed Tom.
"Fog or no fog, I've got to run at full speed!  I've got to chance it!"

Making the bandage as tight as he could and fastening it in place, the
young inventor sprang to the motor and set it in motion.  Then he went
to the wheel.  In a few minutes the ARROW was speeding through the
water as it had never done before, except when it had raced the RED
STREAK.  "If I hit anything--good-by!"  thought Tom grimly.  His hands
were tense on the rim of the steering-wheel and he was ready in an
instant to reverse the motor as he sat there straining his eyes to see
through the curtain of mist that hung over the lake.  Now and then he
glanced at the compass, to keep on the right course, and from time to
time he looked at Mr. Duncan.  The hunter was still unconscious.

How Tom accomplished that trip he hardly remembered afterward.  Through
the fog he shot, expecting any moment to crash into some other boat.
He did pass a rowing craft in which sat a lone fisherman.  The lad was
upon him in an instant, but a turn of the wheel sent the ARROW safely
past, and the startled fisherman, whose frail craft was set to rocking
violently by the swell from the motor-boat, sent an objecting cry
through the fog after Tom.  But the youth did not reply.  On and on he
raced, getting the last atom of power from his motor.

He feared Mr. Duncan would be dead when he arrived, but when he saw the
dock of the sanitarium looming up out of the mist and shut off the
power to slowly run up to it, he placed his hand on the wounded man's
heart and found it still beating.

"He's alive, anyhow," thought the youth, and then his craft bumped up
against the bulkhead and a man in the boathouse on the dock was sent on
the run for a physician.

Mr. Duncan was quickly taken up to the sanitarium on a stretcher and
Tom followed.

"You must have made a record run," observed one of the physicians a
little while afterward, when Tom was telling of his trip while waiting
in the office to hear the report on the hunter's condition.

"I guess I did," muttered the young inventor "only I didn't think so at
the time.  It seemed as if we were only crawling along."




CHAPTER XII

SUSPICIOUS CHARACTERS


Under the skill of the physicians at the lake sanitarium Mr. Duncan's
wound was quickly attended to and the bleeding, which Tom had partly
checked, was completely stopped.  Some medicines having been
administered, the hunter regained a little of his strength, and, about
an hour after he had been brought to the resort, he was able to see
Tom, who, at his request, was admitted to his room.  The young inventor
found Mr. Duncan propped up in bed, with his injured arm bandaged.

"Is the injury a bad one?"  asked Tom, entering softly.

"Not as bad as I feared," replied the hunter, while a trained nurse
placed a chair for the lad at the bedside.  "If it had not been for
you, though, I'm afraid to think of what might have happened."

"I am glad I chanced to be going past when you called," replied the lad.

"Well, you can imagine how thankful I am," resumed Mr. Duncan.  "I'll
thank you more properly at another time.  I hope I didn't delay you on
your trip."

"It's not of much consequence," responded the youth.  "I was only going
to see that everything was all right at our house," and he explained
about his father being at the hotel and mentioned his worriment.  "I
will go on now unless I can do something more for you," resumed Tom.
"I will probably stay at our house all night to-night instead of trying
to get back to Sandport."

"I'd like to send word to my wife about what has happened," said the
hunter.  "If it would not be too much out of your way, I'd appreciate
it if you could stop at my home in Waterford and tell her, so she will
not be alarmed at my absence."

"I'll do it," replied our hero.  "There is no special need of my
hurrying.  I have brought your gun and compass up from the boat.  They
are down in the office."

"Will you do me a favor?"  asked Mr. Duncan quickly.

"Of course."

"Then please accept that gun and compass with my compliments.  They are
both of excellent make, and I don't think I shall use that gun this
season.  My wife would be superstitious about it.  As for the compass,
you'll need one in this fog, and I can recommend mine as being
accurate."

"Oh, I couldn't think of taking them," expostulated Tom, but his eyes
sparkled in anticipation, for he had been wishing for a gun such as Mr.
Duncan owned.  He also needed a compass.

"If you don't take them I shall feel very much offended," the hunter
said, "and the nurse here will tell you that sick persons ought to be
humored.  Hadn't they?"  and he appealed to the pretty young woman, who
was smiling at Tom.

"That's perfectly true," she said, showing her white, even teeth.  "I
think, Mr. Swift, I shall have to order you to take them."

"All right," agreed Tom, "only it's too much for what I did."

"It isn't half enough," remarked Mr. Duncan solemnly.  "Just explain
matters to my wife, if you will, and tell her the doctor says I can be
out in about a week.  But I'm not going hunting or practicing shots
again."

A little later Tom, with the compass before him to guide him on his
course through the fog, was speeding his boat toward Waterford.  Now
and then he glanced at the fine shotgun which he had so unexpectedly
acquired.

"This will come in handy this fall!"  he exclaimed.  "I'll go hunting
quail and partridge as well as wild ducks.  This compass is just what I
need, too."

Mrs. Duncan was at first very much alarmed when Tom started to tell her
of the accident, but she soon calmed down as the lad went more into
details and stated how comparatively out of danger her husband now was.
The hunter's wife insisted that Tom remain to dinner, and as he had
made up his mind he would have to devote two days instead of one to the
trip to his house, he consented.

The fog lifted that afternoon, and Tom, rejoicing in the sunlight,
which drove away the storm clouds, speeded up the ARROW until she was
skimming over the lake like a shaft from a bow.

"This is something like," he exclaimed.  "I'll soon be at home, find
everything all right and telephone to dad.  Then I'll sleep in my own
room and start back in the morning."

When Tom was within a few miles of his own boathouse he heard behind
him the "put-put"  of a motor craft.  Turning, he saw the RED STREAK
fairly flying along at some distance from him.

"Andy certainly is getting the speed out of her now," he remarked.
"He'd beat me if we were racing, but the trouble with his boat and
engine is that he can't always depend on it.  I guess he doesn't
understand how to run it.  I wonder if he'll offer to race now?"

But the red-haired owner of the auto boat evidently did not intend to
offer Tom a race.  The RED STREAK went on down the lake, passing the
ARROW about half a mile away.  Then the young inventor saw that Andy
had two other lads in the boat with him.

"Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey, I guess," he murmured.  "Well, they're
a trio pretty much alike.  The farther off they are the better I like
it."

Tom once more gave his attention to his own boat.  He was going at a
fair speed, but not the limit, and he counted on reaching home in about
a half hour.  Suddenly, when he was just congratulating himself on the
smooth-running qualities of his motor, which had not missed an
explosion, the machinery stopped.

"Hello!"  exclaimed the young inventor in some alarm.  "What's up now?"

He quickly shut off the gasoline and went back to the motor.  Now there
are so many things that may happen to a gasoline engine that it would
be difficult to name them all offhand, and Tom, who had not had very
much experience, was at a loss to find what had stopped his machinery.
He tried the spark and found that by touching the wire to the top of
the cylinder, when the proper connection was, made, that he had a hot,
"fat one."  The compression seemed all right and the supply pipe from
the gasoline tank was in perfect order.  Still the motor would not go.
No explosion resulted when he turned the flywheel over, not even when
he primed the cylinder by putting a little gasoline in through the
cocks on the cylinder heads.

"That's funny," he remarked to himself as he rested from his labors and
contemplated the "dead" motor.  "First time it has gone back on me."
The boat was drifting down the lake, and, at the sound of another motor
craft approaching, Tom looked up.  He saw the RED STREAK, containing
Andy Foger and his cronies.  They had observed the young inventor's
plight.

"Want a tow?"  sneered Andy.

"What'll you take for your second-hand boat that won't run?" asked Pete
Bailey.

"Better get out of the way or you might be run down," added Sam
Snedecker.

Tom was too angry and chagrined to reply, and the RED STREAK swept on.

"I'll make her go, if it takes all night!" declared Tom energetically.
Once more he tried to start the motor.  It coughed and sighed, as if in
protest, but would not explode.  Then Tom cried: "The spark plug!
That's where the trouble is, I'll wager.  Why didn't I think of it
before?"

It was the work of but a minute to unscrew the spark plugs from the
tops of the cylinders.  He found that both had such accumulations of
carbon on them that no spark could ever have reached the mixture of
gasoline and air.

"I'll put new ones in," he decided, for he carried a few spare plugs
for emergencies.  Inside of five minutes, with the new plugs in place,
the motor was running better than before.

"Now for home!"  cried Tom, "and if I meet Andy Foger I'll race him
this time."

But the RED STREAK was not in sight, and, a little later, Tom had run
the ARROW into the boathouse, locked the door and was on his way up to
the mansion.

"I suppose Mrs. Baggert and Garret will be surprised to see me," he
remarked.  "Maybe they'll think we don't trust them, by coming back in
this fashion to see that everything is safe.  But then, I suppose, dad
is naturally nervous about some of his valuable machinery and
inventions.  I think I'll find everything all right, though."

As Tom went up the main path and swung off to a side one, which was a
short cut to the house, he saw in the dusk, for it was now early
evening, a movement in the bushes that lined the walk.

"Hello, Garret!"  exclaimed the lad, taking it for granted it was the
engineer employed by Mr. Swift.

There was no reply, and Tom, with a sudden suspicion, sprang toward the
bushes.  The shrubbery was more violently agitated and, as the lad
reached the screen of foliage, he saw a man spring up from the ground
and take to his heels.

"Here!  Who are you?  What do you want?"  yelled Tom.

Hardly had he spoken when from behind a big apple tree another man
sprung.  It was light enough so that the lad could see his face, and a
glimpse of it caused him to cry out:

"Happy Harry, the tramp!"

Before he could call again the two men had disappeared.




CHAPTER XIII

TOM IN DANGER


"Garret!  Garret Jackson!" cried Tom as he struggled through the hedge
of bushes and ran after the men.  "Where are you, Garret?  Come on and
help me chase these men!"

But there came no answer to Tom's hail.  He could not hear the sound of
the retreating footsteps of the men now and concluded that they had
made their escape.  Still he would not give up, but dashed on, slipping
and stumbling, now and then colliding with a tree.

"What can they be doing here?" thought Tom in great anxiety.  "Are they
after some more of dad's inventions because they didn't get his turbine
motor?"

"Hello!  Who's there?  Who are you?" called a voice suddenly.

"Oh, Garret!  Where have you been?" asked the young inventor,
recognizing the tones of his father's keeper.  "I've been calling you.
Some of those scoundrels are around again!"

"Why if it isn't Tom!" ejaculated the engineer.  "However in the world
did you get here?  I thought you were at Sandport."

"I'll explain later, Garret.  Just now I want to catch those men, if I
can."

"Which men?"

"Happy Harry and another one.  I saw them hiding down by the orchard
path.  Come on, they're right ahead of us."

But though they hunted as well as they were able to in the
fast-gathering darkness, there was no trace of the intruders.  They had
to give up, and Tom, after going to the boathouse to see that the ARROW
was all right, returned to the house, where he told the engineer and
housekeeper what had brought him back and how he had surprised the two
men.

"Is everything all right, Garret?" he concluded.  "Dad is nervous and
frightened.  I must telephone him at the hotel to-night and let him
know, for I promised to come back.  I can't, though, until to-morrow."

"Everything is all right as far as I know," answered Jackson.  "I've
kept a careful watch and the burglar alarm has been in working order.
Mrs. Baggert and I haven't been disturbed a single night since you went
away.  It's curious that the men should be here the very night you come
back.  Maybe they followed you."

"I hardly think so, for they didn't know I was coming."

"You can't tell what those fellows know," commented the engineer.
"But, anyhow, I don't suppose they could have gotten here from Sandport
as soon as you did."

"Oh, yes they could, in their automobile," declared Tom.  "But I don't
believe they knew I was coming.  They knew we were away, however, and
thought it would be a good time to steal something, I guess.  Are you
sure nothing has been taken?"

"Perfectly sure, but you and I will take a look around the shop."

They made a hasty examination, but found nothing disturbed and no signs
that anyone had tried to break in.

"I think I'll telephone dad that everything is all right," decided Tom.
"It is as far as his inventions are concerned, and if I tell about
seeing the men it will only worry him.  I can explain that part better
when I see him.  But when I go back, Garret, you will have to be on
your guard, since those men are in the neighborhood."

"I will, Tom.  Don't worry."

Mr. Swift was soon informed by his son over the telephone that nothing
in the shops had been disturbed, and the inventor received the news
with evident satisfaction.  He requested Tom to come back to the hotel
in the morning, in order that the three of them might go for a ride
about the lake in the afternoon, and Tom decided to make an early start.

The night passed without incident, though Tom, who kept the gun Mr.
Duncan had given him in readiness for use, got up several times,
thinking he heard suspicious noises.  After an early breakfast, and
having once more cautioned the engineer and housekeeper to be on their
guard, Tom started back in the ARROW.

As it would not be much out of his way, the young inventor decided to
cut across the lake and stop at the sanitarium, that he might inquire
about Mr. Duncan.  He thought he could speed the ARROW up sufficiently
to make up for any time he might lose, and, with this in mind, he
headed out toward the middle of Lake Carlopa.  The engine was working
splendidly with the new spark plugs, and Tom was wondering if there was
any possible method of getting more revolutions out of the motor.  He
had about come to the conclusion that a new propeller might answer his
purpose when he heard the noise of an approaching boat.  He looked up
quickly and exclaimed:

"Andy Foger again, and Pete and Sam are with him.  It's a wonder he
wouldn't go off on a trip instead of cruising around so near home.
Guess he's afraid he'll get stuck."

Idly Tom watched the RED STREAK.  It was cutting through the water at a
fast rate, throwing up curling foam on either side of the sharp bow.
"He seems to be heading this way," mused Tom.  "Well, I'm not going to
race with him to-day."

Nearer and nearer came the speedy craft, straight for the ARROW.  The
young inventor shifted his helm in order to get out of Andy's course,
but to his surprise he saw that the red haired lad changed the
direction of his own boat.

"Guess he wants to see how close he can come to me," thought our hero.
"Maybe he wants to show how fast he's going."

The RED STREAK was now so close that the features of the occupants
could easily be distinguished.  There were grins on the faces of Andy
and his cronies.

"Get out of the way or we'll run you down!" cried the bully.  "We've
got the right of way."

"Don't you try anything like that!" shouted Tom in some alarm, not that
he was afraid of Andy, but the RED STREAK was getting dangerously near,
and he knew Andy was not a skillful helmsman.  The auto-boat was now
headed directly at the ARROW and coming on speedily.  Andy was bending
over the wheel and Tom had begun to turn his, in order to get well out
of the way of the insolent, squint-eyed lad and his friends.

Suddenly Andy uttered a cry and leaped up.

"Look out!  Look out!" he yelled.  "My steering gear has broken!  I
can't change my course.  Look out!"

The RED STREAK was bearing right down on Tom's boat.

"Shut off your power!  Reverse!" shouted Tom.

Andy seemed confused and did not know what to do.  Sam Snedecker sprang
to the side of his crony, but he knew even less about a motor-boat.  It
looked as if Tom would be run down, and he was in great danger.

But the young inventor did not lose his head.  He put his wheel hard
over and then, leaping to his motor, sent it full speed forward.  Not a
moment too soon had he acted, for an instant later the other boat shot
past the stern of the ARROW, hitting it a severe but glancing blow.
Tom's boat quivered from end to end and he quickly shut off the power.
By this time Andy had succeeded in slowing down his craft.  The young
inventor hastily looked over the side of the ARROW.  One of the rudder
fastenings had been torn loose.

"What do you mean by running me down?" shouted Tom angrily.

"I--I didn't do it on purpose," returned Andy contritely.  "I was
seeing how near I could come to you when my steering gear broke.  I
hope I haven't damaged you."

"My rudder's broken," went on Tom "and I've got to put back to repair
it.  I ought to have you arrested for this!"

"I'll pay for the damage," replied Andy, and he was so frightened that
he was white, in spite of his tan and freckles.

"That won't do me any good now," retorted Tom.  "It will delay me a
couple of hours.  If you try any tricks like that again, I'll complain
to the authorities and you won't be allowed to run a boat on this lake."

Andy knew that his rival was in the right and did not reply.  The bully
and his cronies busied themselves over the broken steering gear, and
the young inventor, finding that he could make a shift to get back to
his boathouse, turned his craft around and headed for there, in order
to repair the damage.




CHAPTER XIV

THE ARROW DISAPPEARS


Paying no heed to the occupants of the bully's boat, who, by reason of
their daring, had been responsible for his accident that might have
resulted seriously, Tom was soon at his dock.  He had it conveniently
arranged for hoisting craft out of the water to repair them, and in a
few minutes the stern of the ARROW was elevated so that he could get at
the rudder.

"Well, it's not as bad as I thought," he remarked when, with critical
eye, he had noted the damage done.  "I can fix it in about an hour if
Garret helps me."

Going up to the house to get some tools and to tell the engineer that
he had returned, Tom looked out over the lake and saw Andy's boat
moving slowly off.

"They've got her fixed up in some kind of shape," he murmured.  "It's a
shame for a chump like Andy to have a good boat like that.  He'll spoil
it in one season.  He's getting altogether too reckless.  First thing
he knows, he and I will have a clash and I'll pay back some of the old
scores."

Mr. Jackson was much surprised to see the young inventor home again so
soon, as was also Mrs. Baggert.  Tom explained what had happened, and
he and the engineer went to work repairing the damage done by the RED
STREAK.  As the owner of the ARROW had anticipated, the work did not
take long, and, shortly before dinner time, the boat was ready to
resume the interrupted trip to Sandport.

"Better stay and have lunch," urged Mrs. Baggert.  "You can hardly get
to the hotel by night, anyhow, and maybe it would be better not to
start until to-morrow."

"No, I must get back to-night or dad would be worried," declared Tom.
"I've been gone longer now than I calculated on.  But I will have
dinner here, and, if necessary, I can do the last half of the trip
after dark.  I know the way now and I have a compass and a good
searchlight."

The ARROW was let down into the water again and tied outside the
boathouse ready for a quick start.  The dinner Mrs. Baggert provided
was so good that Tom lingered over it longer than he meant to, and he
asked for a second apple dumpling with hard sauce on.  So it was with a
very comfortable feeling indeed and with an almost forgiving spirit
toward Andy Foger that our hero started down the path to the lake.

"Now for a quick run to Sandport," he said aloud.  "I hope I shan't see
any more of those men and that dad hasn't been bothered by them.  His
suspicions about the house weren't altogether unfounded, for I did see
the tramp and some one else sneaking around, but I don't believe
they'll come back now."

Tom swung around the path that led to the dock.  As he came in sight of
the water, he stared as if he could not believe what he saw, or,
rather, what he did not see.  For there was no craft tied to the
string-piece, where he had fastened his motor-boat.  He looked again,
rubbed his eyes to make sure and then cried out:

"The ARROW is gone!"

There was no doubt of it.  The craft was not at the dock.  Breaking
into a run, Tom hastened to the boathouse.  The ARROW was not in there,
and a look across the lake showed only a few rowboats in sight.

"That's mighty funny," mused the youth.  "I wonder--"

He paused suddenly in his thoughts.

"Maybe Garret took it out to try and see that it worked all right," he
said hopefully.  "He knows how to run a boat.  Maybe he wanted to see
how the rudder behaved and is out in it now.  He got through dinner
before I did.  But I should have thought he'd have said something to me
if he was going out in it."

This was the one weak point in Tom's theory, and he felt it at once.

"I'll see if Garret is in his shop," he went on as he turned back
toward the house.

The first person he met as he headed for the group of small structures
where Mr. Swift's inventive work was carried on was Garret Jackson, the
engineer.

"I--I thought you were out in my boat!" stammered Tom.

"Your boat!  Why would I be out in your boat?" and Mr. Jackson removed
his pipe from his mouth and stared at the young inventor.

"Because it's gone!"

"Gone!" repeated the engineer, and then Tom told him.  The two hurried
down to the dock, but the addition of another pair of eyes was of no
assistance in locating the ARROW.  The trim little motor craft was
nowhere to be seen.

"I can't understand it," said Tom helplessly.  "I wasn't gone more than
an hour at dinner, and yet--"

"It doesn't take long to steal a motor-boat," commented the engineer.

"But I think I would have heard them start it," went on the lad.
"Maybe it drifted off, though I'm sure I tied it securely."

"No, there's not much likelihood of that.  There's no wind to-day and
no currents in the lake.  But it could easily have been towed off by
some one in a rowboat and then you would not have heard the motor
start."

"That's so," agreed the youth.  "That's probably how they did it.  They
sneaked up here in a rowboat and towed the ARROW off.  I'm sure of it."

"And I'll wager I know who did it," exclaimed Mr. Jackson energetically.

"Who?" demanded Tom quickly.

"Those men who were sneaking around--Happy Harry and his gang.  They
stole the boat once and they'd do it again.  Those men took your boat,
Tom."

The young inventor shook his head.

"No," he answered, "I don't believe they did."

"Why not?"

"Well, because they wouldn't dare come back here when they knew we're
on the lookout for them.  It would be too risky."

"Oh, those fellows don't care for risk," was the opinion of Mr.
Jackson.  "Take my word for it, they have your boat.  They have been
keeping watch, and as soon as they saw the dock unprotected they
sneaked up and stole the ARROW."

"I don't think so," repeated Mr. Swift's son.

"Who do you think took it then?"

"Andy Foger!" was the quick response.  "I believe he and his cronies
did it to annoy me.  They have been trying to get even with me-or at
least Andy has--for outbidding him on this boat.  He's tried several
times, but he hasn't succeeded--until now.  I'm sure Andy Foger has my
boat," and Tom, with a grim tightening of his lips, swung around as
though to start in instant pursuit.

"Where are you going?" asked Mr. Jackson.

"To find Andy and his cronies.  When I locate them I'll make them tell
me where my boat is."

"Hadn't you better send some word to your father?  You can hardly get
to Sandport now, and he'll be worried about you."

"That's so, I will.  I'll telephone dad that the boat--no, I'll not do
that either, for he'd only worry and maybe get sick.  I'll just tell
him I've had a little accident, that Andy ran into me and that I can't
come back to the hotel for a day or two.  Maybe I'll be lucky to find
my boat in that time.  But dad won't worry then, and, when I see him, I
can explain.  That's what I'll do," and Tom was soon talking to Mr.
Swift by telephone.

The inventor was very sorry his son could not come back to rejoin him
and Ned, but there was no help for it, and, with as cheerful voice as
he could assume, the lad promised to start for Sandport at the earliest
opportunity.

"Now to find Andy and my boat!" Tom exclaimed as he hung up the
telephone receiver.




CHAPTER XV

A DISMAYING STATEMENT


Trouble is sometimes good in a way; it makes a person resourceful.  Tom
Swift had had his share of annoyances of late, but they had served a
purpose.  He had learned to think clearly and quickly.  Now, when he
found his boat stolen, he at once began to map out a plan of action.

"What will you do first?" asked Mr. Jackson as he saw his employer's
son hesitating.

"First I'm going to Andy Foger's house," declared the young inventor.
"If he's home I'm going to tell him what I think of him.  If he's not,
I'm going to find him."

"Why don't you take your sailboat and run down to his dock?" suggested
the engineer.  "It isn't as quick as your motor-boat, but it's better
than walking."

"So it is," exclaimed the lad.  "I will use my catboat.  I had
forgotten all about it of late.  I'm glad you spoke."

He was soon sailing down the lake in the direction of the boathouse on
the waterfront of Mr. Foger's property.  It needed but a glance around
the dock to show him that the RED STREAK was not there, but Tom
recollected the accident to the steering gear and thought perhaps Andy
had taken his boat to some wharf where there was a repair shop and
there left it to return home himself.  But inquiry of Mrs. Foger, who
was as nice a woman as her son was a mean lad, gave Tom the information
that his enemy was not at home.

"He telephoned to me that his boat was damaged," said Mrs. Foger
gently, "and that he had taken it to get fixed.  Then, he said, he and
some friends were going on a little cruise and might not be back
to-night."

"Did he say where he was going?" asked our hero, who did not tell
Andy's mother why he wanted to see her son.

"No, and I'm worried about him.  Sometimes I think Andy is too--well,
too impetuous, and I'm afraid he will get into trouble."

Tom, in spite of his trouble, could hardly forbear smiling.  Andy's
mother was totally unaware of the mean traits of her son and thought
him a very fine chap.  Tom was not going to undeceive her.

"I'm afraid something will happen to him," she went on.  "Do you think
there is any danger being out on the lake in a motor-boat, Mr. Swift?
I understand you have one."

"Yes, I have one," answered Tom.  He was going to say he had once had
one, but thought better of it.  "No, there is very little danger this
time of year," he added.

"I am very glad to hear you say so," went on Mrs. Foger with a sigh.
"I shall feel more at ease when Andy is away now.  When he returns
home, I shall tell him you called upon him and he will return your
visit.  I am glad to see that the custom of paying calls has not died
out among the present generation.  It is a pleasant habit, and I am
glad to have my son conform to it.  He shall return your kind visit."

"Oh, no, it's of no consequence," replied Tom quickly, thinking grimly
that his visit was far from a friendly one.  "There is no need to tell
your son I was here.  I will probably see him in a day or two.

"Oh, but I shall tell him," insisted Mrs. Foger with a kind smile.
"I'm sure he will appreciate your call."

There was much doubt concerning this in the mind of the young inventor,
but he did not express it and soon took his leave.  Up and down the
lake for the rest of the day he cruised, looking in vain for a sight of
Andy Foger in the RED STREAK, but the racing boat appeared to be well
hidden.

"If I only could find where they've taken mine," mused Tom.  "Hang it
all, this is rotten luck!" and for the first time he began to feel
discouraged.

"Maybe you'd better notify the police," suggested Mr. Jackson when Tom
returned to the Swift house that night.  "They might help locate it."

"I think I can do as well as the police," answered the youth.  "If the
boat is anywhere it's on the lake, and the police have no craft in
which to make a search."

"That's so," agreed the engineer.  "I wish I could help you, but I
don't believe it would be wise for me to leave the house, especially
since those men have been about lately."

"No, you must stay here," was Tom's opinion.  "I'll take another day or
two to search.  By this time Andy and his gang will return, I'm sure,
and I can tackle them."

"Suppose they don't?"

"Well, then I'll make a tour of the lake in my sailboat and I'll run up
to Sandport and tell dad, for he will wonder what's keeping me.  I'll
know better next time than to leave my boat at the dock without taking
out the connection at the spark coil, so no one can start the motor.  I
should have done that at first, but you always think of those things
afterward."

The lad began his search again the next morning and cruised about in
little bays and gulfs looking for a sight of the RED STREAK or the
ARROW, but he saw neither, and a call at Andy's house showed that the
red-haired youth had not returned.  Mrs. Foger was quite nervous over
her son's continued absence, but Mr. Foger thought it was all right.

Another day passed without any results and the young inventor was
getting so nervous, partly with worrying over the loss of his boat and
partly on his father's account, that he did not know what to do.

"I can't stand it any longer," he announced to Mrs. Baggert the night
of the third day, after a telephone message had been received from Mr.
Swift.  The inventor wanted to know why his son did not return to the
hotel to join him and Ned.  "Well, what will you do?" asked the
housekeeper.

"If I don't find my boat to-morrow, I'll sail to Sandport, bring home
dad and Ned and we three will go all over the lake.  My boat must be on
it somewhere, but Lake Carlopa is so cut up that it could easily be
hidden."

"It's queer that the Foger boy doesn't come home.  That makes it look
as if he was guilty."

"Oh, I'm sure he took it all right," returned Tom.  "All I want is to
see him.  It certainly is queer that he stays away as long as he does.
Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey are with him, too.  But they'll have to
return some time."

Tom dreamed that night of finding his boat and that it was a wreck.  He
awoke, glad to find that the latter part was not true, but wishing that
some of his night vision might come to pass during the day.

He started out right after breakfast, and, as usual, headed for the
Foger home.  He almost disliked to ask Mrs. Foger if her son had yet
returned, for Andy's mother was so polite and so anxious to know
whether any danger threatened that Tom hardly knew how to answer her.
But he was saved that embarrassment on this occasion, for as he was
going up the walk from the lake to the residence he met the gardener
and from him learned that Andy had not yet come back.

"But his mother had a message from him, I did hear," went on the man.
"He's on his way.  It seems he had some trouble."

"Trouble.  What kind of trouble?" asked Tom.

"I don't rightly know, sir, but," and here the gardener winked his eye,
"Master Andy isn't particular what kind of trouble he gets into."

"That's right," agreed our hero, and as he went down again to where he
had left his boat he thought: "Nor what kind of trouble he gets other
people into.  I wish I had hold of him for about five minutes!"

The sailboat swung slowly from the dock and heeled over to the gentle
breeze.  Hardly knowing what to do, Tom headed for the middle of the
lake.  He was discouraged and tired of making plans only to have them
fail.

As he looked across the stretch of water he saw a boat coming toward
him.  He shaded his eyes with his hand to see better, and then, with a
pair of marine glasses, took an observation.  He uttered an exclamation.

"That's the RED STREAK as sure as I'm alive!" he cried.  "But what's
the matter with her?  They're rowing!"

The lad headed his boat toward the approaching one.  There was no doubt
about it.  It was Andy Foger's craft, but it was not speeding forward
under the power of the motor.  Slowly and laborious the occupants were
pulling it along, and as it was not meant to be rowed, progress was
very slow.

"They've had a breakdown," thought Tom. "Serves 'em right!  Now wait
till I tackle 'em and find out where my boat is.  I've a good notion to
have Andy Foger arrested!"

The sailing craft swiftly approached the motor-boat.  Tom could see the
three occupants looking at him, apprehensively as well as curiously, he
thought.

"Guess they didn't think I'd keep after 'em," mused the young inventor,
and a little later he was beside the RED STREAK.

"Well," cried Tom angrily, "it's about time you came back!"

"We've had a breakdown," remarked Andy, and he seemed quite humiliated.
He was beginning to find out that he didn't know as much about a
motor-boat as he thought he did.

"I've been waiting for you," went on Tom.

"Waiting for us?  What for?" asked Sam Snedecker.

"What for?  As if you didn't know!" blurted out the owner of the ARROW.
"I want my boat, Andy Foger, the one you stole from me and hid!  Tell
me where it is at once or I'll have you arrested!"

"Your boat!" repeated the bully, and there was no mistaking the
surprise in his tones.

"Yes, my boat!  Don't try to bluff me like that."

"I'm not trying to bluff you.  We've been away, three days and just got
back."

"Yes, I know you have.  You took my boat with you, too."

"Are you crazy?" demanded Pete Bailey.

"No, but you fellows must have been to think you could take my boat and
me not know it," and Tom, filled with wrath, grasped the gunwale of the
RED STREAK as if he feared it would suddenly shoot away.

"Look here!" burst out Andy, and he spoke sincerely, "we didn't touch
your boat.  Did we, fellows?"

"No!" exclaimed Sam and Pete at once, and they were very much in
earnest.

"We didn't even know it was stolen, did we?" went on Andy.

"No," agreed his chums.  Tom looked unconvinced.

"We haven't taken your boat and we can prove it," continued the bully.
"I know you and I have had quarrels, but I'm telling you the truth, Tom
Swift.  I never touched your boat."

There was no mistaking the sincerity of Andy.  He was not a skilful
deceiver, and Tom, looking into his squint-eyes, which were opened
unusually wide, could not but help believing the fellow.

"We haven't seen it since the day we had the collision," added Andy,
and his chums confirmed this statement.

"We went off on a little cruise," continued the red-haired bully, "and
broke down several times.  We had bad luck.  Just as we were nearing
home something went wrong with the engine again.  I never saw such a
poor motor.  But we never took your boat, Tom Swift, and we can prove
it."

Tom was in despair.  He had been so sure that Andy was the thief, that
to believe otherwise was difficult.  Yet he felt that he must.  He
looked at the disabled motor of the RED STREAK and viewed it with the
interested and expert eye of a machinist, no matter if the owner of it
was his enemy.  Then suddenly a brilliant idea came into Tom's head.




CHAPTER XVI

STILL ON THE SEARCH


"You seem to have lots of trouble with your boat, Andy," said Tom after
a few moments of rather embarrassed silence.

"I do," admitted the owner of the RED STREAK.  "I've had bad luck ever
since I got it, but usually I've been able to fix it by looking in the
book.  This time I can't find out what the trouble is, nor can any of
the fellows.  It stopped when we were out in the middle of the lake and
we had to row.  I'm sick of motor boating."

"Suppose I fix it for you?" went on Tom.

"If you do, I'll pay you well."

"I wouldn't do it for pay--not the kind you mean," continued the young
inventor.

"What do you mean then?" and Andy's face, that had lighted up, became
glum again.

"Well, if I fix your boat for you, will you let me run it a little
while?"

"You mean show me how to run it?"

"No, I mean take it myself.  Look here, Andy, my boat's been stolen,
and I thought you took it to get even with me.  You say you didn't--"

"And I didn't touch it," interposed the squint-eyed lad quickly.

"All right, I believe you.  But somebody stole it, and I think I know
who."

"Who?" asked Sam Snedecker.

"Well, you wouldn't know if I told you, but I suspect some men with
whom I had trouble before," and Tom referred to Happy Harry and his
gang.  "I think they have my boat on this lake, and I'd like to get
another speedy craft to cruise about it and make a further search.  How
about it, Andy?  If I fix your boat, will you let me take it to look
for my boat?"

"Sure thing!" agreed the bully quickly, and his voice for once was
friendly toward Tom.  "Fix the engine so it will run, and you can use
the RED STREAK as long as you like."

"Oh, I probably wouldn't want it very long.  I could cover the lake in
about three days, and I hope by that time I could locate the thieves.
Is it a bargain?"

"Sure," agreed Andy again, and Tom got into the motor-boat to look at
the engine.  He found that it would require some time to adjust it
properly and that it would be necessary to take the motor apart.

"I think I'd better tow you to my dock," the young inventor said to
Andy.  "I can use some tools from the shop then, and by to-night I'll
have the RED STREAK in running order."

The breeze was in the right quarter, fortunately, and with the
motor-boat dragging behind, the ARROW's owner put the nose of the
sailing craft toward his home dock.

When Tom reached his house he found that Mrs. Baggert had received
another telephone message from Mr. Swift, inquiring why his son had not
returned to Sandport.

"He says if you don't come back by to-morrow," repeated the
housekeeper, "that he'll come home by train.  He's getting anxious, I
believe."

"Shouldn't wonder," admitted Tom.  "But I want him to stay there.  The
change will do him good.  I'll soon have my boat back, now that I can
go about the lake swiftly, and then I'll join him.  I'll tell him to be
patient."

Tom talked with his father at some length, assuring him that everything
was well at the Shopton house and promising to soon be with him.  Then
the young inventor began work on the motor of the RED STREAK.  He found
it quite a job and had to call on Mr. Jackson to help him, for one of
the pistons had to be repaired and a number of adjustments made to the
cylinders.

But that night the motor was fully mended and placed back in the boat.
It was in better shape than it had been since Andy had purchased the
craft.

"There," remarked Tom, "now I'm ready to hunt for those scoundrels.
Will you leave your boat at my dock to-night, Andy?"

"Yes, so you can start out early in the morning.  I'm not going."

"Why not?" demanded Tom quickly.

"Well--er--you see I've had enough of motoring for a while," explained
Andy.  "Besides, I don't believe my mother would like me to go out on a
chase after thieves.  If we had to shoot I might hit one of them, and--"

"Oh, I see," answered Tom.  "But I don't like to take your boat alone.
Besides, I don't fancy there will be much shooting.  I know I'm not
going to take a gun.  In fact, the one Mr. Duncan gave me is in the
boat.  All I want is to get the ARROW back."

"That's all right," went on Andy.  "You take my boat and use it as long
as you like.  I'll rest up a few days.  When you find your boat you can
bring mine back."

Tom understood.  He was just as glad not to have Andy accompany him in
the chase, as he and the red-haired lad had never been good friends and
probably never would be.  So it would cause some embarrassment to be
together in a boat all day.  Then again Tom knew he could manage the
RED STREAK better alone, but, of course, he did not want to mention
this when he asked for the loan of the craft.  Andy's own suggestion,
however, had solved the difficulty.  Tom had an idea that Andy felt a
little timid about going in pursuit of the thieves, but naturally it
would not do to mention this, for the squint-eyed lad considered
himself quite a fighter.

Early the next morning, alone in the RED STREAK, Tom continued the
search for his stolen boat.  He started out from his home dock and
mapped out a course that would take him well around the lake.

"I s'pose I could take a run to Sandport now," mused the youth as he
shot in and out of the little bays, keeping watch for the ARROW.  "But
if I do dad will have to be told all about it, and, he'll worry.  Then,
too, he might want to accompany me, and I think I can manage this
better alone, for the RED STREAK will run faster with only one in.  I
ought to wind up this search in two days, if my boat is still on the
lake.  And if those scoundrels have sunk her I'll make them pay for it."

On shot the speedy motor-boat, in and out along the winding shoreline,
with the lad in the bow at the steering-wheel peering with eager eyes
into every nook and corner where his craft might be hidden.




CHAPTER XVII

"THERE SHE IS!"


Anticipating that he would be some time on his search, the young
inventor had gone prepared for it.  He had a supply of provisions and
he had told Mrs. Baggert he might not be back that night.  But he did
not intend to sleep aboard the RED STREAK, which, being a racing boat,
was not large enough to afford much room for passengers.  Tom had
planned, therefore, to put up at some hotel near the lake in case his
hunt should last beyond one night.

That it would do this was almost certain, for all that morning he
searched unavailingly for the ARROW.  A distant mill whistle sounding
over Lake Carlopa told him it was noon.

"Dinner time," he announced to himself.  "Guess I'll run up along shore
in the shade and eat."

Selecting a place where the trees overhung the water, forming a quiet,
cool nook, Tom sent the boat in there, and, tying it to a leaning tree,
he began his simple meal.  Various thoughts filled his mind, but chief
among them was the desire to overtake the thieves who had his boat.
That it was Happy Harry's gang he was positive.

The lad nearly finished eating and was considering what direction he
might best search in next when he heard, running along a road that
bordered the lake, an automobile.

"Wonder who that is?" mused Tom.  "It won't do any harm to take a look,
for it might be some of those thieves again.  They probably still have
their auto or Happy Harry couldn't have gotten from Sandport to Shopton
so quickly."

The young inventor slipped ashore from the motor-boat, taking care to
make no noise.  Stealing silently along toward the road, he peered
through the underbrush for a sight of the machine, which seemed to be
going slowly.  But before the youth had a glimpse of it he was made
aware who the occupant was by hearing someone exclaim:

"Bless my shoe laces if this cantankerous contraption isn't going wrong
again!  I wonder if it's going to have a fit here in this lonely place.
It acts just as if it was.  Bless my very existence! Hold on now.  Be
nice!  Be nice!"

"Mr. Damon!" exclaimed Tom, and, without knowing it, he had spoken
aloud.

"Hold on there!  Hold on!  Who's calling me in this forsaken locality?
Bless my shirt studs!  But who is it?" and the eccentric man who had
sold Tom the motor-cycle looked intently at the bushes.

"Here I am, Mr. Damon," answered the lad, stepping out into the road.
"I knew it was you as soon as I saw you."

"Bless my liver, but that's very true!  I suppose you heard my
unfortunate automobile puffing along.  I declare I don't know what ails
it.  I got it on the advice of my physician, who said I must get out in
the air, but, bless my gears, it's the auto who needs a doctor more
than I do!  It's continually out of order.  Something is going to
happen right away.  I can tell by the way it's behaving."

Mr. Damon had thrown out the clutch, but the engine was still running,
though in a jerky, uncertain fashion, which indicated to the trained
ear of the young inventor that something was wrong.

"Perhaps I can fix it for you as I did before," ventured Tom.

"Bless my eyebrows!  Perhaps you can," cried the eccentric man
hopefully.  "You always seem to turn up at the right moment.  How do
you manage it?"

"I don't know.  I remember the time you turned up just when I wanted
you to help me capture Happy Harry and his gang, and now, by, a strange
coincidence, I'm after them again."

"You don't say so!  My good gracious!  Bless my hatband!  But that's
odd.  There!" he ejaculated suddenly as the automobile engine stopped
with a choking sigh, "I knew something was going to happen."

"Let me take a look," proposed the lad, and he was soon busy peering
into the interior of the machine.  At first he could not find the
trouble, but being a persistent youth, Tom went at it systematically
and located it in two places.  The clutch was not rightly adjusted and
the carburetor float feed needed fixing.  The young inventor was not
long in making the slight repairs and then he assured Mr. Damon that
his automobile would run properly.

"Bless my very existence, but what a thing it is to have a head for
mechanics!" exclaimed the odd man gratefully.  "Now it would bother me
to adjust a nutmeg grater if it got out of order, but I dare say you
could fix it in no time."

"Yes," answered Tom, "I could and so could you, for there's nothing
about it to fix.  But you can go ahead now if you wish."

"Thank you.  It just shows how ignorant I am of machinery.  I presume
something will go wrong in another mile or two.  But may I ask what you
are doing here?  I presume you are in your motor-boat, sailing about
for pleasure.  And didn't I understand you to say you were after those
chaps again?  Bless my watch charm, but I was so interested in my
machine that I didn't think to ask you."

"Yes, I am after those thieves again."

"In your motor-boat, I presume.  Well, I hope you catch them.  What
have they stolen now?"

"My motor-boat.  That's why I'm after them, but I had to borrow a craft
to chase them with."

"Bless my soul!  You don't tell me!  How did it happen?"

Thereupon the lad related as much of the story as was necessary to put
Mr. Damon in possession of the facts and he ended up with:

"I don't suppose you have seen anything of the men in my boat, have
you?"

Mr. Damon seemed strangely excited.  He had entered his auto, but as
the lad's story progressed the odd gentleman had descended.  When Tom
finished he exclaimed:

"Don't say a word now--not a word.  I want to think, and that is a
process, which, for me, requires a little time.  Don't speak a word
now.  Bless my left hand, but I think I can help you!"

He frowned, stamped first one foot, then the other, looked up at the
sky, as if seeking inspiration there, and then down at the ground, as
if that would help him to think.  Then he clapped his hands smartly
together and cried out:

"Bless my shoe buttons!"

"Have you seen them?" asked Tom eagerly.

"Was your boat one with a red arrow painted on the bow?" asked Mr.
Damon in turn.

"It was!" and the lad was now almost as excited as was his friend.

"Then I've seen it and, what's more, this morning!  Bless my spark
plug, I've seen it!"

"Tell me about it!" pleaded the young inventor, and Mr. Damon, calming
himself after an effort, resumed:

"I was out for an early spin in my auto," he said, "and was traveling
along a road that bordered the lake, about fifteen miles above here.  I
heard a motor-boat puffing along near shore, and, looking through the
trees, I saw one containing three men.  It had a red arrow on the bow,
and that's why I noticed it, because I recalled that your boat was
named the DART."

"ARROW," corrected Tom.

"The ARROW.  Oh, yes, I knew it was something like that.  Well of
course at the time I didn't think that it was your boat, but I
associated it in my mind with yours.  Do you catch my meaning?"

Tom did and said so, wishing Mr. Damon would hurry and get to the
point.  But the eccentric character had to do things in his own way.

"Exactly," he resumed. "Well, I didn't think that was your boat, but,
at the same time, I watched the men out of curiosity, and I was struck
with their behavior. They seemed to be quarreling, and, from what I
could hear, two of them seemed to be remonstrating with the third one
for having taken some sort of a piece of wood from the forward
compartment. I believe that is the proper term."

"Yes!" Tom almost shouted.  "But where did they go?  What became of
them?  What was the man doing to the forward compartment--where the
gasoline tank is?"

"Exactly.  I was trying to think what was kept there.  That's it, the
gasoline tank.  Well, the boat kept on up the lake, and I don't know
what became of the men.  But about that piece of wood.  It seems that
one of the men removed a block, from under the tank and the others
objected.  That's why they were quarreling."

"That's very strange," exclaimed the lad.  "There must be some mystery
about my boat that I don't understand.  But that will keep until I get
the boat itself.  Good-by, Mr. Damon.  I must be off."

"Where to?"

"Up the lake after those thieves.  I must lose no time," and Tom
started to go back to where he had left the RED STREAK.

"Hold on!" cried Mr. Damon.  "I have something to propose, Tom.  Two
heads are better than one, even if one doesn't know how to adjust a
nutmeg grate.  Suppose I come along with you?  I can point out the
direction the men took, at any rate."

"I'll be very glad to have you," answered the lad, who felt that he
might need help if there were three of the thieves in his craft.  "But
what will you do with your automobile?"

"I'll just run it down the road a way to where a friend of mine has a
stable.  I'll leave it in there and join you.  Will you let me come?
Bless my eye glasses, but I'd like to help catch those scoundrels!"

"I'll be very glad to have you.  Go ahead, put the auto in the barn and
I'll wait for you."

"I have a better plan than that," replied Mr. Damon.  "Run your boat
down to that point," and he indicated one about a mile up the lake.
"I'll be there waiting for you, and we'll lose no time.  I can cover
the ground faster in my auto than you can in your boat."

Tom saw the advantage of this and was soon under way, while he heard on
shore the puffing of his friend's car.  On the trip to the point Tom
puzzled over the strange actions of the man in taking one of the braces
from under the gasoline tank.

"I'll wager he did it before," thought the lad.  "It must be the same
person who was tampering with the lock of the forward compartment the
day I bought the boat.  But why--that's the question--why?"

He could find no answer to this, puzzle over it as he did, and he gave
it up.  His whole desire now was to get on the trail of the thieves,
and he had strong hopes, after the clew Mr. Damon had given him.  The
latter was waiting for him on the point, and so nimble was the owner of
the auto, in spite of his size, that Tom was not delayed more than the
fraction of a minute ere he was under way again, speeding up the lake.

"Now keep well in toward shore," advised Mr. Damon.  "Those fellows
don't want to be observed any more than they can help, and they'll
sneak along the bank, They were headed in that direction," and he
pointed it out.  "Now I hope you won't think I'm in the way.  Besides,
you know, if you get your boat back, you'll want some one to help steer
it, while you run this one.  I can do that, at all events, bless my
very existence!"

"I am very glad of your help," replied the lad, but he did not take his
eyes from the water before him, and he was looking for a sight of his
boat with the men in it.

For three hours or more Tom and Mr. Damon cruised in and out along the
shore of the lake, going farther and farther up the body of water.  Tom
was beginning to think that he would reach Sandport without catching
sight of the thieves, and he was wondering if, after all, he might not
better stop off and see his father when, above the puffing of the motor
in the RED STREAK, he heard the put-put of another boat.

"Listen!" cried Mr. Damon, who had heard it at the same time.

Tom nodded.

"They're just ahead of us," whispered his companion.

"If it's them," was the lad's reply.

"Speed up and we'll soon see," suggested Mr. Damon, and Tom shoved the
timer over.  The RED STREAK forged ahead.  The sound of the other boat
came more plainly now.  It was beyond a little point of land.  The
young inventor steered out to get around it and leaned eagerly forward
to catch the first glimpse of the unseen craft.  Would it prove to be
the ARROW?

The put-put became louder now.  Mr. Damon was standing up, as if that
would, in some mysterious way, help.  Then suddenly the other boat came
into view.  Tom saw it in an instant and knew it for the ARROW.

"There she is!" he cried.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE PURSUIT


For an instant after Tom's exultant cry the men in the boat ahead were
not aware that they were being pursued.  Then, as the explosions from
the motor of the RED STREAK sounded over the water, they turned to see
who was coming up behind them.  There was no mistaking the attitude of
the young inventor and his companion.  They were leaning eagerly
forward, as if they could reach out and grasp the criminals who were
fleeing before them.

"Put on all the speed you can, Tom!" begged Mr. Damon.  "We'll catch
the scoundrels now.  Speed up the motor!  Oh, if I only had my
automobile now.  Bless my crank shaft, but one can go so much faster on
land than on water."

The lad did not reply, but thought, with grim humor, that running an
automobile over Lake Carlopa would be no small feat.  Mr. Damon,
however, knew what he was saying.

"We'll catch them!  We'll nab 'em!" he cried.  "Speed her up, Tom."

The youth was doing his best with the motor of the RED STREAK.  He was
not as well acquainted with it as he was with the one in his boat, but
he knew, even better than Andy Foger, how to make it do efficient work.
It was a foregone conclusion that the RED STREAK, if rightly handled,
could beat the ARROW, but there were several points in favor of the
thieves.  The motor of Tom's boat was in perfect order, and even an
amateur, with some knowledge of a boat, could make it do nearly its
best.  On the other hand, the RED STREAK's machinery needed "nursing."
Again, the thieves had a good start, and that counted for much.  But
Tom counted on two other points.  One was that Happy Harry and his gang
would probably know little about the fine points of a motor.  They had
shown this in letting the motor of the boat they had first stolen get
out of order, and Tom knew the ins and outs of a gasoline engine to
perfection.  So the chase was not so hopeless as it seemed.

"Do you think you can catch them?" asked Mr. Damon anxiously.

"I'm going to make a big try," answered his companion.

"They're heading out into the middle of the lake!" cried the eccentric
man.

"If they do, I can cut them off!" murmured Tom as he put the wheel over.

But whoever was steering the ARROW knew better than to send it on a
course that would enable the pursuing boat to cut across and shorten
the distance to it.  After sending the stolen craft far enough out from
shore to clear points of land that jutted out into the lake, the
leading boat was sent straight ahead.

"A stern chase and a long chase!" murmured Mr. Damon.  "Bless my
rudder, but those fellows are not going to give up easily."

"I guess not," murmured Tom.  "Will you steer for a while, Mr. Damon?"

"Of course I will.  If I could get out and pull the boat after me, to
make it go faster, I would.  But as I always lose my breath when I run,
perhaps it's just as well that I stay in here."  Tom thought so too,
but his attention was soon given to the engine.  He adjusted the timer
to get if possible a little more speed out of the boat he had borrowed
from Andy, and he paid particular attention to the oiling system.

"We're going a bit faster!" called Mr. Damon' encouragingly, "or else
they're slacking up."

Tom peered ahead to see if this was so.  It was hard to judge whether
he was overhauling the ARROW, as it was a stern chase, and that is
always difficult to judge.  But a glimpse along shore showed him that
they were slipping through the water at a faster speed.

"They're up to something!" suddenly exclaimed Mr. Damon a moment later.
"I believe they're going to fire on us, Tom.  They are pointing
something this way."

The lad stood up and gazed earnestly at his boat, which seemed to be
slipping away from him so fast.  One of the occupants was in the stern,
aiming some glittering object at those in the RED STREAK.  For a moment
Tom thought it might be a gun.  Then, as the man turned, he saw what it
was.

"A pair of marine glasses," cried the lad.  "They're trying to make out
who we are."

"I guess they know well enough," rejoined Mr. Damon.  "Can't you go any
faster, Tom?"

"I'm afraid not.  But we'll land them, sooner or later.  They can't go
very far in this direction without running ashore and we'll have them.
They're cutting across the lake now."

"They may escape us if it gets dark.  Probably that's what they're
working for.  They want to keep ahead of us until nightfall."

The young inventor thought of this too, but there was little he could
do.  The motor was running at top speed.  It could be made to go
faster, Tom knew, with another ignition system, but that was out of the
question now.

The man with the glasses had resumed his seat, and the efforts of the
trio seemed concentrated on the motor of the ARROW.  They, too, wished
to go faster.  But they had not skill enough to accomplish it, and in
about ten minutes, when Tom took another long and careful look to
ascertain if possible whether or not he was overhauling the thieves, he
was delighted to see that the distance between the boats had lessened.

"We're catching them!  We're creeping up on them!" cried Mr. Damon.
"Keep it up, Tom."  There was nothing to do, however, save wait.  The
boat ahead had shifted her course somewhat and was now turning in
toward the shore, for the lake was narrow at this point, and abandoning
their evident intention of keeping straight up the lake, the thieves
seemed now bent on something else.

"I believe they're going to run ashore and get out!" cried Mr. Damon.

"If they do, it's just what I want," declared the lad.  "I don't care
for the men.  I want my boat back!"

The occupants of the ARROW were looking to the rear again, and
one--Happy Harry, Tom thought--shook his fist.

"Ah, wait until I get hold of you!" cried Mr. Damon, following his
example.  "I'll make you wish you'd behaved yourselves, you scoundrels!
Bless my overcoat!  Catch them if you can, Tom."

There was now no doubt of the intention of the fleeing ones.  The shore
was looming up ahead and straight for it was headed the ARROW.  Tom
sent Andy's boat in the same direction.  He was rapidly overhauling the
escaping ones now, for they had slowed down the motor.  Three minutes
later the foremost boat grated on the beach of the lake.  The men
leaped out, one of them pausing an instant in the bow.

"Here, don't you damage my boat!" cried Tom involuntarily, for the man
seemed to be hammering something.

The fellow leaped over the side, holding something in his hand.

"There they go!  Catch them!" yelled Mr. Damon.

"Let them go!" answered the lad as the men ran toward the wood.  "I
want my boat.  I'm afraid they've damaged her.  One of them tore
something from the bow."

At the same instant the two companions of the fellow who had paused in
the forward part of the ARROW saw that he had something in his hand.
With yells of rage they dashed at him, but he, shaking his fist at
them, plunged into the bushes and could be heard breaking his way
through, while his companions were in pursuit.

"They've quarreled among themselves," commented Mr. Damon as high and
angry voices could be heard from the woods.  "There's some mystery
here, Tom."

"I don't doubt it, but my first concern is for my boat.  I want to see
if they have damaged her."

Tom had run so closely in shore with the RED STREAK that he had to
reverse to avoid damaging the craft against the bank.  In a mass of
foam he stopped her in time, and then springing ashore, he hurried to
his motor-boat.




CHAPTER XIX

A QUIET CRUISE


"Have they done any damage?" asked Mr. Damon as he stood in the bow of
the RED STREAK.

Tom did not answer for a moment.  His trained eye was looking over the
engine.

"They yanked out the high tension wire instead of stopping the motor
with the switch," he answered at length, and then, when he had taken a
look into the compartment where the gasoline tank was, he added: "And
they've ripped out two more of the braces I put in.  Why in the world
they did that I can't imagine."

"That's evidently what one man had that the others wanted," was Mr.
Damon's opinion.

"Probably," agreed Tom.  "But what could he or they want with wooden
braces?"

That was a puzzler for Mr. Damon, but he answered:

"Perhaps they wanted to damage your boat and those two men were mad
because the other got ahead of them."

"Taking out the braces wouldn't do much damage.  I can easily put
others in.  All it would do would be to cause the tank to sag down and
maybe cause a leak in the pipe.  But that would be a queer thing to do.
No, I think there's some mystery that I haven't gotten to the bottom of
yet.  But I'm going to."

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Damon.  "I'll help you.  But can you run your
boat back home?"

"Not without fixing it a bit.  I must brace up that tank and put in a
new high-tension wire from the spark coil.  I can do it here, but I'd
rather take it to the shop.  Besides, with two boats to run back, for I
must return Andy's to him, I don't see how I can do it very well unless
you operate one, Mr. Damon."

"Excuse me, but I can't do it.  Bless my slippers, but I would be sure
to run on a rock!  The best plan will be for you to tow your boat and
I'll ride in it and steer.  I can do that much, anyhow.  You can ride
in the RED STREAK."

Tom agreed that this would be a good plan.  So, after temporarily
bracing up the tank in the ARROW, it was shoved out into the lake and
attached to Andy's craft.

"But aren't you going to make a search for those men?" asked Mr. Damon
when Tom was ready to start back.

"No, I think it would be useless.  They are well away by this time, and
I don't fancy chasing them through the woods, especially as night is
coming on.  Besides, I won't leave these boats."

"No doubt you are right, but I would like to see them punished, and I
am curious enough to wish to know what object that scoundrel could have
in ripping out the blocks that served as a brace for the tank."

"I feel the same way myself," commented the lad, "especially since this
is the second time that's happened.  But we'll have to wait, I guess."

A little later the start back was made, Mr. Damon steering the ARROW
skillfully enough so that it did not drag on the leading boat, in which
Tom rode.  His course took him not far from the lake sanitarium, where
Mr. Duncan, the hunter, had been brought, and desiring to know how the
wounded man was getting on, the youth proposed that they make a halt,
explaining to Mr. Damon his reason.

"Yes, and while you're about it you'd better telephone your father that
you will join him to-morrow," suggested the other.  "I know what it is
to fret and worry.  You can fix your boat up in time to go to Sandport
to-morrow, can't you?"

"Yes, I'm glad you reminded me of it.  I'll telephone from the
sanitarium, if they'll let me."

Mr. Duncan was not at the institution, Tom was told, his injury having
healed sufficiently to allow of his being removed to his home.  The
youth readily secured permission to use the telephone, and was soon in
communication with Mr. Swift.  While not telling him all the
occurrences that had delayed him, Tom gave his father and Ned Newton
enough information to explain his absence.  Then the trip to Shopton
was resumed in the two boats.

"What are you going to do about your automobile?" asked Tom as they
neared the point where the machine had been left.

"Never mind about that," replied Mr. Damon.  "It will do it good to
have a night's vacation.  I will go on to your house with you, and
perhaps I can get a train back to my friend's home, so that I can claim
my car."

"Won't you stay all night with me?" invited the young inventor.  "I'd
be glad to have you."

Mr. Damon agreed, and, Tom putting more speed on the RED STREAK, was
soon opposite his own dock.  The ARROW was run in the boathouse and the
owner hastily told Mrs. Baggert and the engineer what had occurred.
Then he took Andy's boat to Mr. Foger's dock and warmly thanked the
red-haired lad for the use of his craft.

"Did you find your boat?" asked Andy eagerly.  "How did the RED STREAK
run?"

"I got my boat and yours runs fine," explained Tom.

"Good!  I'll race you again some day," declared Andy.

Mr. Damon enjoyed his visit at our hero's house, for Mrs. Baggert
cooked one of her best suppers for him.  Tom and the engineer spent the
evening repairing the motor-boat, Mr. Damon looking on and exclaiming
"Bless my shoe leather" or some other part of his dress or anatomy at
every stage of the work.  The engineer wanted to know all about the men
and their doings, but he could supply no reason for their queer actions
regarding the braces under the gasoline tank.

In the morning Tom once more prepared for an early start for Sandport,
and Mr. Damon, reconsidering his plans, rode as far with him as the
place where the automobile had been left.  There he took leave of the
young inventor, promising to call on Mr. Swift in the near future.

"I hope you arrive at the hotel where your father is without any more
accidents," remarked the automobilist.  "Bless my very existence, but
you seem to have the most remarkable series of adventures I ever heard
of!"

"They are rather odd," admitted Tom.  "I don't know that I particularly
care for them, either.  But, now that I have my boat back, I guess
everything will be all right."

But Tom could not look ahead.  He was destined to have still more
exciting times, as presently will be related.

Without further incident he arrived at the Lakeview Hotel in Sandport
that evening and found his father and Ned very glad to see him.  Of
course he had to explain everything then, and, with his son safely in
his sight, Mr. Swift was not so nervous over the recital as he would
have been had Tom not been present.

"Now for some nice, quiet trips," remarked the lad when he had finished
his account.  "I feel as if I had cheated you out of part of your
vacation, Ned, staying away as long as I did."

"Well, of course we missed you," answered his chum.  "But your father
and I had a good time."

"Yes, and I invented a new attachment for a kitchen boiler," added Mr.
Swift.  "I had a chance for it when I passed through the hotel kitchen
one day, for I wanted to see what kind of a range they used."

"I guess there's no stopping you from inventing," replied his son with
a laugh and a hopeless shake of the head.  "But don't let it happen
again when you go away to rest."

"Oh, I only just thought of it," said Mr. Swift.  "I haven't worked the
details out yet."

Then he wanted to know about everything at home and he seemed
particularly anxious lest the Happy Harry gang do some damage.

"I don't believe they will," Tom assured him.  "Garret and Mrs. Baggert
will be on guard."

The next few days were pleasant ones for Tom, his father and Ned
Newton.  They cruised about the lake, went fishing and camped in the
woods.  Even Mr. Swift spent one night in the tent and said he liked it
very much.  For a week the three led an ideal existence, going about as
they pleased, Ned taking a number of photographs with his new camera.
The ARROW proved herself a fine boat, and Tom and Ned, when Mr. Swift
did not accompany them, explored the seldom visited parts of Lake
Carlopa.

The three had been out one day and were discussing the necessity of
returning home soon when Ned spoke.

"I shall hate to give up this life and go to slaving in the bank
again," he complained.  "I wish I was an inventor."

"Oh, we inventors don't have such an easy time," said Mr. Swift.  "You
never know when trouble is coming," and he little imagined how near the
truth he was.

A little later they were at the hotel dock.  When Tom had tied up his
boat the three walked up the path to the broad veranda that faced the
lake.  A boy in uniform met them.

"Some one has just called you on the telephone, Mr. Swift," he reported.

"Some one wants me?  Who is it?"

"I think he said his name is Jackson, sir, Garret Jackson, and he says
the message is very important."

"Tom, something has happened at home!" exclaimed the inventor as he
hurried up the steps.  "I'm afraid there's bad news."

Unable to still the fear in his heart, Tom followed his father.




CHAPTER XX

NEWS OF A ROBBERY


With a hand that trembled so he could scarcely hold the receiver of the
telephone, Mr. Swift placed it to his ear.

"Hello! Hello!" he cried into the transmitter.  "Yes, this is Mr.
Swift--yes, Garret.  What is it?"

Then came a series of clicks, which Tom and Ned listened to.  The
inventor spoke again.

"What's that?  The same men?  Broke in early this evening?  Oh, that's
too bad!  Of course, I'll come at once."

There followed more meaningless clicks, which Tom wished he could
translate.  His father hung up the receiver, turned to him and
exclaimed:

"I've been robbed again!"

"Robbed again!  How, dad?"

"By that same rascally gang, Garret thinks.  This evening, when he and
Mrs. Baggert were in the house the burglar alarm went off.  The
indicator showed that the electrical shop had been entered, and the
engineer hurried there.  He saw a light inside and the shadows of
persons on the windows.  Before he could reach the shop, however, the
thieves heard him coming and escaped.  Oh, Tom, I should never have
come away!"

"But did they take anything, dad?  Perhaps Garret frightened them away
before they had a chance to steal any of your things.  Did you ask him
that?"

"I didn't need to.  He said he made a hasty exanimation before he
called me up, and he is sure a number of my electrical inventions are
missing.  Some of them are devices I never have had patented, and if I
lose them I will have no recovery."

"But just what ones are they?  Perhaps we can send out a police alarm
to-night."

"Garret couldn't tell that," answered Mr. Swift as he paced to and fro
in the hotel office.  "He doesn't know all the tools and machinery I
had in there.  But it is certain that some of my most valuable things
have been taken."

"Never mind.  Don't worry, dad," and Tom tried to speak soothingly, for
he saw that his father was much excited.  "We may be able to get them
back.  How does Garret know the same men who stole the turbine model
broke in the shop this evening?"

"He saw them.  One was Happy Harry, he is positive.  The others he did
not know, but he recognized the tramp from our description of him."

"Then we must tell the police at once."

"Yes, Tom, I wish you would telephone.  I'll give you a description of
the things.  No, I can't do that either, for I don't know what was
stolen.  I must go home at once to find out.  It's a good thing the
motor-boat is here.  Come, let's start at once.  What is my bill here?"
and the inventor turned to the hotel proprietor, who had come into the
office.  "I have suffered a severe loss and must leave at once."

"I am very sorry, sir.  I'll have it ready for you in a few minutes."

"All right.  Tom, is your boat ready for a quick trip?"

"Yes, dad, but I don't like to make it at night with three in.  Of
course it might be perfectly safe, but there's a risk, and I don't like
to take it."

"Don't worry about the risk on my account, Tom.  I'm not afraid.  I
must get home and see of what I have been robbed."

The young inventor was in a quandary.  He wanted to do as his father
requested and to aid him all he could, yet he knew that an all-night
trip in the boat down the lake would be dangerous, not only from the
chance of running on an unknown shore or into a hidden rock, but
because Mr. Swift was not physically fitted to stand the journey.

"Come, Tom," exclaimed the aged inventor impatiently, "we must start at
once!"

"Won't morning do as well, dad?"

"No, I must start now.  I could not sleep worrying over what has
happened.  We will start--"

At that instant there came a low, rumbling peal of thunder.  Mr. Swift
started and peered from a window.  There came a flash of lightning and
another vibrant report from the storm-charged clouds.

"There is your bill, Mr. Swift," remarked the proprietor, coming up,
"but I would not advise you to start to-night.  There is a bad storm in
the west, and it will reach here in a few minutes.  Storms on Lake
Carlopa, especially at this open and exposed end, are not to be
despised, I assure you."

"But I must get home!" insisted Tom's father.

The lace curtain over the window blew almost straight out with a sudden
breeze, and a flash of lightning so bright that it reflected even in
the room where the incandescent electrics were glowing made several
others jump.  Then came a mighty crash, and with that the flood-gates
of the storm were opened, and the rain came down in torrents.  Tom
actually breathed a sigh of relief.  The problem was solved for him.
It would be impossible to start to-night, and he was glad of it, much
as he wanted to get on the trail of the thieves.

There was a scurrying on the part of the hotel attendants to close the
windows, and the guests who had been enjoying the air out on the
porches came running in.  With a rush, a roar and a muttering, as peal
after peal of thunder sounded, the deluge continued.

"It's a good thing we didn't start," observed Ned.

"I should say so," agreed Tom.  "But we'll get off the first thing in
the morning, dad."

Mr. Swift did not reply, but his nervous pacing to and fro in the hotel
office showed how anxious he was to be at home again.  There was no
help for it, however, and, after a time, finding that to think of
reaching his house that night was out of the question, the inventor
calmed down somewhat.

The storm continued nearly all night, as Tom could bear witness, for he
did not sleep well, nor did his father.  And when he came down to
breakfast in the morning Mr. Swift plainly showed the effects of the
bad news.  His face was haggard and drawn and his eyes smarted and
burned from lack of sleep.

"Well, Tom, we must start early," he said nervously.  "I am glad it has
cleared off.  Is the boat all ready?"

"Yes, and it's a good thing it was under shelter last night or we'd
have to bail it out now, and that would delay us."

An hour later they were under way, having telephoned to the engineer at
the Swift home that they were coming.  Garret Jackson reported over the
wire that he had notified the Shopton police of the robbery, but that
little could be done until the inventor arrived to give a description
of the stolen articles.

"And that will do little good, I fear," remarked Tom.  "Those fellows
have evidently been planning this for some time and will cover their
tracks well.  I'd like to catch them, not only to recover your things,
dad, but to find out the mystery of my boat and why the man took the
tank braces."




CHAPTER XXI

THE BALLOON ON FIRE


Down Lake Carlopa speeded the ARROW, those on board watching the banks
slip past as the motor-boat rapidly cut through the water.

"What time do you think we ought to reach home, Tom?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Oh, about four o'clock, if we don't stop for lunch."

"Then we'll not stop," decided the inventor.  "We'll eat what we have
on board.  I suppose you have some rations?" and he smiled, the first
time since hearing the bad news.

"Oh, yes, Ned and I didn't eat everything on our camping trips," and
Tom was glad to note that the fine weather which followed the storm was
having a good effect on his father.

"We certainly had a good time," remarked Ned.  "I don't know when I've
enjoyed a vacation so."

"It's too bad it had to be cut short by this robbery," commented Mr.
Swift.

"Oh, well, my time would be up in a few days more," went on the young
bank employee.  "It's just as well to start back now."

Tom took the shortest route he knew, keeping in as close to shore as he
dared, for now he was as anxious to get home as was his father.  On and
on speeded the ARROW, yet fast as it was, it seemed slow to Mr. Swift,
who, like all nervous persons, always wanted to go wherever he desired
to go instantly.

Tom headed his boat around a little point of land, and was urging the
engine to the top notch of speed, for now he was on a clear course,
with no danger from shoals or hidden rocks, when he saw, darting out
from shore, a tiny craft which somehow seemed familiar to him.  He
recognized a peculiar put-putter of the motor.

"That's the DOT," he remarked in a low voice to Ned, "Miss Nestor's
cousin's boat."

"Is she in it now?" asked Ned.

"Yes," answered Tom quickly.

"You've got good eyesight," remarked Ned dryly, "to tell a girl at that
distance.  It looks to me like a boy."

"No, it's Mary--I mean Miss Nestor," the youth quickly corrected
himself, and a close observer would have noticed that he blushed a bit
under his coat of tan.

Ned laughed, Tom blushed still more, and Mr. Swift, who was in a stern
seat, glanced up quickly.

"It looks as if that boat wanted to hail us," the inventor remarked.

Tom was thinking the same thing, for, though he had changed his course
slightly since sighting the DOT, the little craft was put over so as to
meet him.  Wondering what Miss Nestor could want, but being only too
willing to have a chat with her, the young inventor shifted his helm.
In a short time the two craft were within hailing distance.

"How do you do?" called Miss Nestor, as she slowed down her motor.
"Don't you think I'm improving, Mr. Swift?"

"What's that?  I--er--I beg your pardon, but I didn't catch that,"
exclaimed the aged inventor quickly, coming out of a sort of day-dream.
"I beg your pardon."  He thought she had addressed him.

Miss Nestor blushed and looked questioningly at Tom.

"My father," he explained as he introduced his parent.  Ned needed
none, having met Miss Nestor before.  "Indeed you have improved very
much," went on our hero.  "You seem able to manage the boat all alone."

"Yes, I'm doing pretty well.  Dick lets me take the DOT whenever I want
to, and I thought I'd come out for a little trial run this morning.
I'm getting ready for the races.  I suppose you are going to enter
them?" and she steered her boat alongside Tom's, who throttled down his
powerful motor so as not to pass his friend.

"Races?  I hadn't heard of them," he replied.

"Oh, indeed there are to be fine ones under the auspices of the Lanton
Motor Club.  Mr. Hastings, of whom you bought that boat, is going to
enter his new CARLOPA, and Dick has entered the DOT, in the baby class
of course.  But I'm going to run it, and that's why I'm practicing."

"I hope you win," remarked Tom.  "I hadn't heard of the races, but I
think I'll enter.  I'm glad you told me.  Do you want to race now?" and
he laughed as he looked into the brown eyes of Mary Nestor.

"No, indeed, unless you give me a start of several miles."

They kept together for some little time longer, and then, as Tom knew
his father would be restless at the slow speed, he told Miss Nestor the
need of haste, and, advancing his timer, he soon left the DOT behind.
The girl called a laughing good-by and urged him not to forget the
races, which were to take place in about two weeks.

"I suppose Andy Foger will enter his boat," commented Ned.

"Naturally," agreed Tom.  "It's a racer, and he'll probably think it
can beat anything on the lake.  But if he doesn't manage his motor
differently, it won't."

The distance from Sandport to Shopton had been more than half covered
at noon, when the travelers ate a lunch in the boat.  Mr. Swift was
looking anxiously ahead to catch the first glimpse of his dock and Tom
was adjusting the machinery as finely as he dared to get out of it the
maximum speed.

Ned Newton, who happened to be gazing aloft, wondering at the perfect
beauty of the blue sky after the storm, uttered a sudden exclamation.
Then he arose and pointed at some object in the air.

"Look!" he cried, "A balloon!  It must have gone up from some fair."

Tom and his father looked upward.  High in the air, almost over their
heads, was an immense balloon.  It was of the hot-air variety, such as
performers use in which to make ascensions from fair grounds and
circuses, and below it dangled a trapeze, upon which could be observed
a man, only he looked more like a doll than a human being.

"I shouldn't like to be as high as that," remarked Ned.

"I would," answered Tom as he slowed down the engine the better to
watch the balloon.  "I'd like to go up in an airship, and I intend to
some day."

"I believe he's going to jump!" suddenly exclaimed Ned after a few
minutes.  "He's going to do something, anyhow."

"Probably come down in a parachute," said Tom.  "They generally do
that."

"No!  No!" cried Ned.  "He isn't going to jump.  Something has
happened!  The balloon is on fire!  He'll be burned to death!"

Horror stricken, they all gazed aloft.  From the mouth of the balloon
there shot a tongue of fire, and it was followed by a cloud of black
smoke.  The big bag was getting smaller and seemed to be descending,
while the man on the trapeze was hanging downward by his hands to get
as far as possible away from the terrible heat.




CHAPTER XXII

THE RESCUE


"Jump!  Jump!" cried Mr. Swift, leaping to his feet and motioning to
the man on the trapeze of the balloon.  But it is doubtful whether or
not the performer heard him.  Certainly he could not see the frantic
motions of the inventor.  "Why doesn't he jump?" Mr. Swift went on
piteously to the two lads.  "He'll surely be burned to death if he
hangs on there!"

"It's too far to leap!" exclaimed Tom.  "He's a good way up in the air,
though it looks like only a short distance.  He would be killed if he
dropped now."

"He ought to have a parachute," added Ned.  "Most of those men do when
they go up in a balloon.  Why doesn't he come down in that?  I wonder
how the balloon took fire?"

"Maybe he hasn't a parachute," suggested Tom, while he slowed down the
motor-boat still more so as to remain very nearly under the blazing
balloon.

"Yes, he has!" cried Ned.  "See, it's hanging to one side of the big
bag.  He ought to cut loose.  He could save himself then.  Why doesn't
he?"

The balloon was slowly twisting about, gradually settling to the
surface of the lake, but all the while the flames were becoming fiercer
and the black clouds of smoke increased in size.

"There, see the parachute!" went on Ned.

The twisting of the bag had brought into view the parachute or big,
umbrella-shaped bag, which would have enabled the man to safely drop to
the surface of the lake.  Without it he would have hit the water with
such force that he would have been killed as surely as if he had struck
the solid earth.  But the boys and Mr. Swift also saw something else,
and this was that the balloon was on fire on the same side where the
parachute was suspended.

"Look! Look!" shouted Tom, bringing his boat to a stop.  "That's why he
can't jump!  He can't reach the parachute!"

By this time the balloon had settled so low that the actions of the man
could be plainly seen. That he was in great agony of fear, as well as
in great pain from the terrific heat over his head was evident. He
shifted about on the trapeze bar, now hanging by one hand, so as to
bring his body a little farther below the blazing end of the bag, then,
when one arm tired, he would hang by the other. If the balloon would
only come down more quickly it would get to within such a short
distance of the water that the man could safely make the drop. But the
immense canvas bag was settling so slowly, for it was still very
buoyant, that considerable time must elapse before it would be near
enough to the water to make it safe for the unfortunate man to let go
the trapeze.

"Oh, if we could only do something!" cried Tom.  "We have to remain
here helpless and watch him burn to death.  It's awful!"

The three in the boat continued to gaze upward.  They could see the man
making frantic efforts to reach his parachute from time to time.  Once,
as a little current of air blew the flames and smoke to one side, he
thought he had a chance.  Up on the trapeze bar he pulled himself and
then edged along it in an endeavor to grasp the ring of the parachute.
Once he almost had hold of that and also the cord, which ran to a knife
blade.  This cord, being pulled, would sever the rope that bound it to
the balloon, and he would be comparatively safe, so he might drop to
the lake.  But, just as he was about to grasp the ring and cord the
smoke came swirling down on him and the hungry flames seemed to put out
their fiery tongues to devour him.  He had to slide back and once more
hung by his hands.

"I thought he was saved then," whispered Tom, and even the whisper
sounded loud in the silence.

Several men came running along the shore of the lake now.  They saw the
occupants in the ARROW and cried out:

"Why don't you save him?  Go to his rescue!"

"What can we do?" asked Ned quietly of his two friends, but he did not
trouble to answer the men on shore, who probably did not know what they
were saying.

The motor-boat had drifted from a spot under the unfortunate
balloonist, and at a word from his father the young inventor started
the engine and steered the craft back directly under the blazing bag
again.

"If he does drop, perhaps we may be able to pick him up," said Mr.
Swift.  "I wish we could save him!"

A cry from Ned startled Tom and his father, and their eyes, that had
momentarily been directed away from the burning bag high in the air,
were again turned toward it.

"The balloon is falling apart!" exclaimed Ned.  "It's all up with him
now!"

Indeed it did seem so, for pieces of the burning canvas, blazing and
smoking, were falling in a shower from the part of the bag already
consumed, and the fiery particles were fairly raining down on the man.
But he still had his wits about him, though his perilous position was
enough to make any one lose his mind, and he swung from side to side on
the bar, shifting skillfully with his hands and dodging the larger
particles of blazing canvas.  When some small sparks fell on his
clothing he beat them out with one hand, while with the other he clung
to the trapeze.

There was scarcely any wind or the man's plight might have been more
bearable, for the current of air would have carried the smoke and fire
to one side.  As it was, most of the smoke and flames went straight up,
save now and then, when a draught created by the heat would swirl the
black clouds down on the performer, hiding him from sight for a second
or two.  A breeze would have carried the sparks away instead of letting
them fall on him.

Nearer and nearer to the surface of the lake sank the balloon.  By this
time the crowd on the bank had increased and there were excited
opinions as to what was best to do.  But the trouble was that little
could be done.  If the man could hold out until he got near enough to
the water to let go he might yet be saved, but this would not be for
some time at the present rate the balloon was falling.  The performer
realized this, and, as the fire was getting hotter, he made another
desperate attempt to reach the parachute.  It was unavailing and he had
to drop back, hanging below the slender bar.

Suddenly there came a puff of wind, fanning the faces of those in the
motor-boat, and they looked intently to observe if there was any
current as high as was the balloonist.  They saw the big bag sway to
one side and the flames broke out more fiercely as they caught the
draught.  The balloon moved slowly down the lake.

"Keep after it, Tom!" urged his father.  "We may be able to save him!"

The lad increased the speed of his engine and Ned, who was at the
wheel, gave it a little twist.  Then, with a suddenness that was
startling, the blazing canvas airship began to settle swiftly toward
the water.  It had lost much of its buoyancy.

"Now he can jump!  He's near enough to the water now!" cried Tom.

But a new danger arose.  True, the balloon was rapidly approaching the
surface of the lake and in a few seconds more would be within such a
short distance that a leap would not be fatal.  But the burning bag was
coming straight down and scarcely would the man be in the water ere the
fiery canvas mass would be on top of him.

In such an event he would either be burned to death or so held down
that drowning must quickly follow.

"If there was only wind enough to carry the balloon beyond him after he
jumped he could do it safely!" cried Ned.

Tom said nothing.  He was measuring, with, his eye, the distance the
balloon had yet to go and also the distance away the motor-boat was
from where it would probably land.

"He can do it!" exclaimed the young inventor.

"How?" asked his father.

For answer Tom caught up a newspaper he had purchased at the hotel that
morning.  Rolling it quickly into a cone, so that it formed a rough
megaphone, he put the smaller end to his mouth, and, pointing the
larger opening at the balloonist, he called out:

"Drop into the lake!  We'll pick you up before the bag falls on you!
Jump!  Let go now!"

The balloonist heard and understood.  So did Ned and Mr. Swift.  Tom's
quick wit had found a way to save the man.

Faster and faster the blazing bag settled toward the surface of the
water.  It was now merely a mushroom-shaped piece of burning and
smoking canvas, yet it was supporting the man almost as a parachute
would have done.

With one look upward to the burning mass above him and a glance
downward to the lake, the aeronaut let go his hold.  Like a shot he
came down, holding his body rigid and straight as a stick, for he knew
how to fall into water, did that balloonist.

Tom Swift was ready for him.  No sooner had the lad called his
directions through the megaphone than the young inventor had speeded up
his engine to the top notch.

"Steer so as to pick him up!" Tom cried to Ned, who was at the wheel.
"Pass by him on a curve, and, as soon as I grab him, put the wheel over
so as to get out from under the balloon."

It was a risky thing to do, but our hero had it all planned out.  He
made a loop of the boat's painter, and, hurrying to the bow, leaned
over as far as he could, holding the rope in readiness.  His idea was
to have the balloonist grab the strands and be pulled out of danger by
the speedy motor-boat, for the blazing canvas would cover such an
extent of water that the man could not have swum out of the danger zone
in time.

Down shot the balloonist and down more slowly settled the collapsed
bag, yet not so slowly that there was any time to spare.  It needed
only a few seconds to drop over the performer, to burn and smother him.

Into the water splashed the man, disappearing from sight as when a
stick is dropped in, point first.  Ned was alert and steered the boat
to the side in which the man's face was, for he concluded that the
aeronaut would strike out in that direction when he came up.  The ARROW
was now directly under the blazing balloon and cries of fear from the
watchers on shore urged upon Tom and his companions the danger of their
position.  But they had to take some risk to rescue the man.

"There he is!" cried Mr. Swift, who was on the watch, leaning over the
side of the boat.  Tom and Ned saw him at the same instant.  Ned
shifted his wheel and the young inventor bent over, holding out the
rope for the man to grasp.  He saw it and struck out toward the ARROW.
But there was no need for him to go far.  An instant more and the
speeding motor-boat shot past him.  He grabbed the rope and Tom, aided
by Mr. Swift, began to lift him out of the water.

"Quick!  To one side, Ned!" yelled Tom, for the heat of the descending
mass of burning canvas struck him like a furnace blast.

Ned needed no urging.  With a swirl of the screw the ARROW shot herself
out of the way, carrying the aeronaut with her.  A moment later the
burning balloon, or what there was left of it, settled down into the
lake, hissing angrily as the fire was quenched by the water and
completely covering the spot where, but a few seconds before, the man
had been swimming.  He had been saved in the nick of time.




CHAPTER XXIII

PLANS FOR AN AIRSHIP


"Slow her down, Ned!" cried Tom, for the ARROW was shooting so swiftly
through the water that the young inventor found it impossible to pull
up the balloonist.  Ned hurried back to the motor, and, when the boat's
way had been checked, it was an easy matter to pull the dripping and
almost exhausted man into the craft.

"Are you much hurt?" asked Mr. Swift anxiously, for Tom was too much
out of breath with his exertion to ask any questions.  For that matter
the man was in almost as bad a plight.  He was breathing heavily, as
one who had run a long race.

"I--I guess I'm all right," he panted.  "Only burned a little on my
hands.  That--that was a close call!"

The boat swung around and headed for shore, on which was quite a throng
of persons.  Some of them had cheered when they saw the plucky rescue.

"I'm afraid we can't save your balloon," gasped Tom as he looked at the
place where the canvas was still floating and burning.

"No matter.  It wasn't worth much.  That's the last time I'll ever go
up in a hot-air balloon," said the man with more energy than he had
before exhibited.  "I'm done with 'em.  I've had my lesson.  Hereafter
an aeroplane or a gas balloon for me.  I only did this to oblige the
fair committee.  I'll not do it again."

The man spoke in short, crisp sentences, as though he was in too much
of a hurry to waste his words.

"Let it sink," he went on.  "It's no good.  Glad to see the last of it."

Almost as he spoke, with a final hiss and a cloud of steam that mingled
with the black smoke, the remains of the big bag sunk beneath the
surface of the lake.

"We must get you ashore at once and to a doctor," said Mr. Swift.  "You
must be badly burned."

"Not much.  Only my hands, where some burning pieces of canvas fell on'
em.  If I had a little oil to put on I'd be all right."

"I can fix you up better than that," put in Tom.  "I have some
Vaseline."

"Good!  Just the thing.  Pass it over," and the man, though he spoke
shortly, seemed grateful for the offer.  "My name's Sharp," he went on,
"John Sharp, of no place in particular, for I travel all over.  I'm a
professional balloonist.  Ha!  That's the stuff!"

This last was in reference to a bottle of Vaseline, which Tom produced.
Mr. Sharp spread some over the backs of his hands and went on:

"That's better.  Much obliged.  I can't begin to thank you for what you
did for me--saved my life.  I thought it was all up with me--would have
been but for you.  Mustn't mind my manner--it's a way I have--have to
talk quick when you're balloonin'--no time--but I'm grateful all the
same.  Who might you people be?"

Tom told him their names and Mr. Swift asked the aeronaut if he was
sure he didn't need the services of a physician.

"No doctor for me," answered the balloonist.  "I've been in lots of
tight places, but this was the worst squeeze.  If you'll put me ashore,
I guess I can manage now."

"But you're all wet," objected Tom.  "Where will you go?  You need some
other clothes," for the man wore a suit of tights and spangles.

"Oh, I'm used to this," went on the performer.  "I frequently have to
fall in the water.  I always carry a little money with me so as to get
back to the place where I started from.  By the way, where am I?"

"Opposite Daleton," answered Tom.  "Where did you go up from?"

"Pratonia.  Big fair there.  I was one of the features."

"Then you're about fifteen miles away," commented Mr. Swift.  "You can
hardly get back before night.  Must you go there?"

"Left my clothes there.  Also a valuable gas balloon.  No more hot-air
ones for me.  Guess I'd better go back," and the aeronaut continued to
speak in his quick, jerky sentences.

"We'd be very glad to have you come with us, Mr. Sharp," went on the
inventor.  "We are not far from Shopton, and if you would like to
remain over night I'm sure we would make you comfortable.  You can
proceed to Pratonia in the morning."

"Thanks.  Might not be a bad idea," said Mr. Sharp.  "I'm obliged to
you.  I've got to go there to collect my money, though I suppose they
won't give it all to me."

"Why not?" demanded Ned.

"Didn't drop from my parachute.  Couldn't.  Fire was one
reason--couldn't reach the parachute, and if I could have, guess it
wouldn't have been safe.  Parachute probably was burned too.  But I'm
done with hot-air balloons though I guess I said that before."

The boys were much interested in the somewhat odd performer, and, on
his part, he seemed to take quite a notion to Tom, who told him of
several things that he had invented. "Well," remarked Mr. Swift after a
while, during which the boat had been moving slowly down the lake, "if
we are not to go ashore for a doctor for you, Mr. Sharp, suppose we put
on more speed and get to my home? I'm anxious about a robbery that
occurred there," and he related some facts in the case.

"Speed her up!" exclaimed Mr. Sharp.  "Wish I could help you catch the
scoundrels, but afraid I can't--hands too sore," and he looked at his
burns.  Then he told how he had made the ascension from the Pratonia
fair grounds and how, when he was high in the air, he had discovered
that the balloon was on fire.  He described his sensations and told how
he thought his time had surely come.  Sparks from the hot air used to
inflate it probably caused the blaze, he said.

"I've made a number of trips," he concluded, "hot air and gas bags, but
this was the worst ever.  It got on my nerves for a few minutes," he
added coolly.

"I should think it would," agreed Tom as he speeded up the motor and
sent the ARROW on her homeward way.

The boys and Mr. Swift were much interested in the experiences of the
balloonist and asked him many questions, which he answered modestly.
Several hours passed and late that afternoon the party approached
Shopton.

"Here we are!" exclaimed Mr. Swift, relief in his tones.  "Now to see
of what I have been robbed and to get the police after the scoundrels!"

When the boat was nearing the dock Mr. Sharp, who had been silent for
some time, suddenly turned to Tom and asked:

"Ever invent an airship?"

"No," replied the lad, somewhat surprised.  "I never did."

"I have," went on the balloonist.  "That is, I've invented part of it.
I'm stuck over some details.  Maybe you and I'll finish it some day.
How about it?"

"Maybe," assented Tom, who was occupied just then in making a good
landing.  "I am interested in airships, but I never thought I could
build one."

"Easiest thing in the world," went on Mr. Sharp, as if it was an
everyday matter.  "You and I will get busy as soon as we clear up this
robbery."  He talked as though he had been a friend of the family for
some time, for he had a genial, taking manner.

A little later Mr. Swift was excitedly questioning Garret Jackson
concerning the robbery and making an examination of the electrical shop
to discover what was missing.

"They've taken some parts of my gyroscope!" he exclaimed, "and some
valuable tools and papers, as well as some unfinished work that will be
difficult to replace."

"Much of a loss?" asked Mr. Sharp with a business-like air.

"Well, not so large as regards money," answered the inventor, "but they
took things I can never replace, and I will miss them very much if I
cannot get them back."

"Then we'll get them back!" snapped the balloonist, as if that was all
there was to it.

The police were called up on the telephone and the facts given to them,
as well as a description of the stolen things.  They promised to do
what they could, but, in the light of past experiences, Tom and his
father did not think this would be much.  There was little more that
could be done that evening.  Ned Newton went to his home, and, after
Mr. Swift had insisted in calling in his physician to look after Mr.
Sharp's burns the balloonist was given a room next to Tom's.  Then the
Swift household settled down.

"Well," remarked Tom to his father, as he got ready for bed, "this sure
has been an exciting day."

"And my loss is a serious one," added the inventor somewhat sadly.

"Don't worry, dad," begged his son.  "I'll do my best to recover those
things for you."

Several days passed, but there was no clew to the thieves.  That they
were the same ones who had stolen the turbine model there was little
doubt, but they seemed to have covered their tracks well.  The police
were at a loss, and, though Tom and Mr. Sharp cruised about the lake,
they could get no trace of the men.  The balloonist had sent to
Pratonia for his clothing and other baggage and was now installed in
the Swift home, where he was invited to stay a week or two.

One night when he was looking over some papers he had taken from his
trunk the balloonist came over to where Tom was making a drawing of a
new machine he was planning and said:

"Like to see my idea for an airship?  Different from some.  It's a
dirigible balloon with an aeroplane front and rear to steer and balance
it in big winds.  It would be a winner, only for one thing.  Maybe you
can help me."

"Maybe I can," agreed Tom, who was at once interested.

"We ought to be able to do something.  Look at our names--Swift and
Sharp--quick and penetrating--a good firm to build airships," and he
laughed genially.  "Shall we do it?"

"I'm willing," agreed Tom, and the balloonist spread his plans out on
the table, he and the young inventor soon being deep in a discussion of
them.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE MYSTERY SOLVED


From then on, for several days, the young inventor and his new friend
lived in an atmosphere of airships.  They talked them from morning
until night, and even Mr. Swift, much as he was exercised over his
loss, took part in the discussions.

In the meanwhile efforts had not ceased to locate the robbers and
recover the stolen goods, but so far without success.

One afternoon, about two weeks after the thrilling rescue of John
Sharp, Tom said to the balloonist:

"Wouldn't you like to come for a ride in the motor-boat?  Maybe it will
help us to solve the puzzle of the airship.  We'll take a trip across
and up the opposite shore."

"Good idea," commented Mr. Sharp.  "Fine day for a sail.  Come on.
Blow the cobwebs from our brains."

Mr. Swift declined an invitation to accompany them, as he said he would
stay home and try to straighten out his affairs, which were somewhat
muddled by the robbery.

Out over the blue waters of Lake Carlopa shot the ARROW.  It was making
only moderate speed, as Tom was in no hurry, and he knew his engine
would last longer if not forced too frequently.  They glided along,
crossed the lake and were proceeding up the opposite shore when, as
they turned out from a little bay and rounded a point of land, Mr.
Sharp exclaimed:

"Look out, Tom, there's rowboat just ahead!"

"Oh, I'll pass well to one side of that," answered the young inventor,
looking at the craft.  As he did so, noting that there were four men in
it, one of the occupants caught a glimpse of the ARROW.  No sooner had
he done so than he spoke to his companions, and they all turned to
stare at Tom.  At first the lad could scarcely believe his eyes, but as
he looked more intently he uttered a cry.

"There they are!"

"Who?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"Those men--the thieves!  We must catch them!"

Tom had spoken loudly, but even though the men in the rowboat did hear
what he said, they would have realized without that that they were
about to be pursued, for there was no mistaking the attitude of our
hero.

Two of the thieves were at the oars, and, with one accord, they at once
increased their speed.  The boat swung about sharply and was headed for
the shore, which they seemed to have come from only a short time
previous, as the craft was not far out in the lake.

"No, you don't!" cried Tom. "I see your game!  You want to get to the
woods, where you'll have a better chance to escape!  If this isn't
great luck, coming upon them this way!"

It was the work of but a moment to speed up the engine and head the
ARROW for the rowboat.  The men were pulling frantically, but they had
no chance.

"Get between them and the shore!" cried Mr. Sharp. "You can head them
off then." This was good advice and Tom followed it. The men, among
whom the lad could recognize Happy Harry and Anson Morse, were all
excited. Two of them stood up, as though to jump overboard, but their
companions called to them to stop.

"If we only had a gun now, not to shoot at them but to intimidate
them," murmured the balloonist, "maybe they'd stop."

"Here's one," answered Tom, pointing to the seat locker, where he kept
the shotgun Mr. Duncan had given him.  In a moment Mr. Sharp had it out.

"Surrender!" he cried, pointing the weapon at the men in the small boat.

"Don't shoot!  Don't fire on us!  We'll give up!" cried Happy Harry,
and the two with the oars ceased pulling.

"Don't take any chances," urged Mr. Sharp in a low voice.  "Keep
between them and the shore.  I'll cover them."  Tom was steering from
an auxiliary side wheel near the motor, and soon the ARROW had cut off
the retreat of the men.  They could not land and to row across the lake
meant speedy capture.

"Well, what do you want of us?" growled Morse.  "What right have you
got to interfere with us in this fashion?"

"The best of right," answered Tom.  "You'll find out when you're landed
in jail."

"You can't arrest us," sneered Happy Harry.  "You're not an officer and
you haven't any warrant."

Tom hadn't thought of that, and his chagrin showed in his face.  Happy
Harry was quick to see it.

"You'd better let us go," he threatened "We can have you arrested for
bothering us.  You haven't any right to stop us, Tom Swift."

"Maybe he hasn't, but I have!" exclaimed John Sharp suddenly.

"You!  Who are you?" demanded Featherton, alias Simpson, the man who
had run the automobile that carried Tom away.

"Me.  I'm a special deputy sheriff for this county," answered the
balloonist simply.  "Here's my badge," and, throwing back his coat, he
displayed it.  "You see I got the appointment in order to have some
authority in the crowds that gather to watch me go up," he explained to
Tom, who plainly showed his astonishment.  "I found it very useful to
be able to threaten arrest, but in this case I'll do more than
threaten.  You are my prisoners," he went on to the men in the boat,
and he handled the shotgun as if he knew how to use it.  "I'll take you
into custody on complaint of Mr. Swift for robbery.  Now will you go
quietly or are you going to make a fuss?" and Mr. Sharp shut his jaw
grimly.

"Well, seeing as how you have the drop on us, I guess we'll have to do
as you say," admitted Happy Harry, alias Jim Burke.  "But you can't
prove anything against us.  We haven't any of Mr. Swift's property."

"Well, you know where it is then," retorted Tom quickly.

Under the restraining influence of the gun the men made no resistance.
While Mr. Sharp covered them, Tom towed their boat toward shore.  Then,
while the young inventor held the gun, the balloonist tied the hands
and feet of the thieves in a most scientific manner, for what he did
not know about ropes and knots was not worth putting into a book.

"Now, I guess they'll stay quiet for a while," remarked Mr. Sharp as he
surveyed the crestfallen criminals.  "I'll remain on guard here, Tom,
while you go notify the nearest constable and we'll take them to jail.
We bagged the whole lot as neatly as could be desired."

"No, you didn't get all of us!" exclaimed Happy Harry, and there was a
savage anger in his tones.

"Keep quiet!" urged Morse.

"No, I'll not keep quiet!  It's a shame that we have to take our
medicine while that trimmer, Tod Boreck, goes free.  He ought to have
been with us, and he would be, only he's trying to get away with that
sparkler!"

"Keep quiet," again urged Morse.

Tom was all attention.  He had caught the word "sparkler," and he at
once associated it with the occasion he had heard the men use it
before.  He felt that he was on the track of solving the mystery
connected with his boat.

He looked at the men.  They were the same four who had been involved in
the former theft--Appleson, Featherton, Morse and Burke.  Were there
five of them?  He recalled the man who had been caught tampering with
his boat--the man who had tried to bid on the ARROW at the auction.
Where was he?

"Boreck didn't get what he was after," resumed Happy Harry, "and I'm
going to spoil his game for him.  Say, kid," he went on to Tom, "look
in the front part of your boat--where the gasoline tank is."

Tom felt his heart beating fast.  At last he felt that he would solve
the puzzle.  He opened the forward compartment.  To his disappointment
it seemed as usual.  Morse and the others were making a vain effort to
silence Happy Harry.

"I don't see anything here," said Tom.

"No, because it's hidden in one of those blocks of wood you use for a
brace," continued the man.  "Which one it is, Boreck didn't know, so he
pulled out two or three, only to be fooled each time.  You must have
shifted them, kid, from the way they were when we had the boat."

"I did," answered the young inventor, recollecting how he had taken out
some of the braces and inserted new ones, then painted the interior of
the compartment.  "What is in the braces, anyhow?"

"The sparkler--a big diamond--in a hollow place in the wood, kid!"
exclaimed Happy Harry, blurting out the words.  "I'm not going to let
Tod Boreck get away with it while we stay in jail."

"Take out all the braces that haven't been moved and have a look,"
suggested Mr. Sharp.  Tom only had to remove two, those farthest back,
for all the others had, at one time or another, been changed or taken
away by the thief.

One of the blocks did not seem to have anything unusual about it, but
at the sight of the other Tom could not repress a cry.  It was the one
that seemed to have had a hole bored in it and then plugged up again.
He remembered his father noticing it on the occasion of overhauling the
boat.

"The sparkler's in there," said the tramp as he saw the brace.  "Boreck
was after it several times, but he never pulled out the right one."

With his knife Tom dug out the putty that covered the round hole in the
block.  No sooner had he done so than there rolled out into his hand a
white object.  It was something done up in tissue paper, and as he
removed the wrapper, there was a flash in the sunlight and a large,
beautiful diamond was revealed.  The mystery had been solved.




CHAPTER XXV

WINNING A RACE


"Where did this diamond come from?" demanded Mr. Sharp of the quartette
of criminals.

"That's for us to know and you to find out," sneered Happy Harry.  "I
don't care as long as that trimmer Boreck didn't get it.  He tried to
do us out of our share."

"Well, I guess the police will make you tell," went on the balloonist.
"Go for the constable, Tom."

Leaving his friend to guard the ugly men, who for a time at least were
beyond the possibility of doing harm, Tom hurried off through the woods
to the nearest village.  There he found an officer and the gang was
soon lodged in jail.  The diamond was turned over to the authorities,
who said they would soon locate the owner.

Nor were they long in doing it, for it appeared the gem was part of a
large jewel robbery that had taken place some time before in a distant
city.  The Happy Harry gang, as the men came to be called, were
implicated in it, though they got only a small share of the plunder.
Search was made for Tod Boreck and he was captured about a week after
his companions.  Seeing that their game was up, the men made a partial
confession, telling where Mr. Swift's goods had been secreted, and the
inventor's valuable tools, papers and machinery were recovered, no
damage having been done to them.

It developed that after the diamond theft, and when the gang still had
possession of Mr. Hastings' boat, Boreck, sometimes called Murdock by
his cronies, unknown to them, had secreted the jewel in one of the
braces under the gasoline tank.  He expected to get it out secretly,
but the capture of the gang and the sale of the boat prevented this.
Then he tried to buy the craft to take out the diamond, but Tom overbid
him.  It was Boreck who found Andy's bunch of keys and used one to open
the compartment lock when Tom surprised him.  The man did manage to
remove some of the blocks, thinking he had the one with the diamond in
it, but the fact of Tom changing them, and painting the compartment
deceived him.  The gang hoped to get some valuables from Mr. Swift's
shops, and, to a certain extent, succeeded after hanging around for
several nights and following him to Sandport, but Tom eventually proved
too much for them.  Even stealing the Arrow, which was taken to aid the
gang in robbing Mr. Swift, did not succeed, and Boreck's plan then to
get possession of the diamond fell through.

It was thought that the gang would get long terms in prison, but one
night, during a violent storm, they escaped from the local jail and
that was the last seen of them for some time.

A few days after the capture as Tom was in the boathouse making some
minor repairs to the motor he heard a voice calling:

"Mistah Swift, am yo' about?"

"Hello, Rad, is that you?" he inquired, recognizing the voice of the
colored owner of the mule Boomerang.

"Yais, sa, dat's me.  I got a lettah fo' yo'.  I were passin' de
post-office an' de clerk asted me to brung it to yo' 'case as how it's
marked 'hurry,' an' he said he hadn't seen yo' to-day."

"That's right.  I've been so busy I haven't had time to go for the
mail," and Tom took the letter, giving Eradicate ten cents for his
trouble.

"Ha, that's good!" exclaimed Tom as he read it.

"Hab some one done gone an' left yo' a fortune, Mistah Swift?" asked
the negro.

"No, but it's almost as good.  It's an invitation to take part in the
motor-boat races next week.  I'd forgotten all about them.  I must get
ready."

"Good land!  Dat's all de risin' generation t'inks about now," observed
Eradicate, "racin' an' goin' fast.  Mah ole mule Boomerang am good
enough fo' me," and, shaking his head in a woeful manner, Eradicate
went on his way.

Tom told Mr. Sharp and his father of the proposed races of the Lanton
Motor-boat Club, and, as it was required that two persons be in a craft
the size of the ARROW, the young inventor arranged for the balloonist
to accompany him.  Our hero spent the next few days in tuning up his
motor and in getting the ARROW ready for the contest.

The races took place on that side of Lake Carlopa near where Mr.
Hastings lived, and he was one of the officials of the club.  There
were several classes, graded according to the horsepower of the motors,
and Tom found himself in a class with Andy Foger.

"Here's where I beat you," boasted the red-haired youth exultantly,
though his manner toward Tom was more temperate than usual.  Andy had
learned a lesson.

"Well, if you can beat me I'll give you credit for it," answered Tom.

The first race was for high-powered craft, and in this Mr. Hastings'
new CARLOPA won.  Then came the trial of the small boats, and Tom was
pleased to note that Miss Nestor was on hand in the tiny DOT.

"Good luck!" he called to her as he was adjusting his timer, for his
turn would come soon.  "Remember what I told you about the spark," for
he had given her a few lessons.

"If I win it will be due to you," she called brightly.

She did win, coming in ahead of several confident lads who had better
boats.  But Miss Nestor handled the DOT to perfection and crossed the
line a boat's length ahead of her nearest competitor.

"Fine!" cried Tom, and then came the warning gun that told him to get
ready for his trial.

This was a five-mile race and had several entrants.  The affair was a
handicap one and Tom had no reason to complain of the rating allowed
him.

"Crack!" went the starting pistol and away went Tom and one or two
others who had the same allowance as did he.  A little later the others
started and finally the last class, including Andy Foger.  The RED
STREAK shot ahead and was soon in the lead, for Andy and Sam had
learned better how to handle their craft.  Tom and Mr. Sharp were
worried, but they stuck grimly to the race and when the turning stake
was reached Tom's motor had so warmed up and was running so well that
he crept up on Andy.  A mile from the final mark Andy and Tom were on
even terms, and though the red-haired lad tried to shake off his rival
he could not.  Andy's ignition system failed him several times and he
changed from batteries to magneto and back again in the hope of getting
a little more speed out of the motor.

But it was not to be.  A half-mile away from the finish Tom, who had
fallen behind a little, crept up on even terms.  Then he slowly forged
ahead, and, a hundred rods from the stake, the young inventor knew that
the race was his.  He clinched it a few minutes later, crossing the
line amid a burst of cheers.  The ARROW had beaten several boats out of
her own class and Tom was very proud and happy.

"My, but we certainly did scoot along some!" cried Mr. Sharp.  "But
that's nothing to how we'll go when we build our airship, eh, Tom?" and
he looked at the flushed face of the lad.

"No, indeed," agreed the young inventor.  "But I don't know that we'll
take part in any races in it.  We'll build it, however, as soon as we
can solve that one difficulty."

They did solve it, as will be told in the next book of this series, to
be called "Tom Swift and His Airship; or, The Stirring Cruise of the
RED CLOUD."  They had some remarkable adventures in the wonderful
craft, and solved the mystery of a great bank robbery.

This ended the contests of the motor-boats and the little fleet crowded
up to the floats and docks, where the prizes were to be awarded.  Tom
received a handsome silver cup and Miss Nestor a gold bracelet.

"Now I want all the contestants, winners and losers, to come up to my
house and have lunch," invited Mr. Hastings.

As Tom and the balloonist strolled up the walk to the handsome house
Andy Foger passed them.

"You wouldn't have beaten me if my spark coil hadn't gone back on me,"
he said, somewhat sneeringly.

"Maybe," admitted Tom, and just then he caught sight of Mary Nestor.
"May I take you in to lunch?" he asked.

"Yes," she said, "because you helped me to win," and she blushed
prettily.  And then they all sat down to the tables set out on the
lawn, while Tom looked so often at Mary Nestor that Mr. Sharp said
afterward it was a wonder he found time to eat.  But Tom didn't care.
He was happy.

========================================
========================================

TOM SWIFT AND HIS MOTOR-BOAT

Or

The Rivals of Lake Carlopa


By

VICTOR APPLETON




CONTENTS

     I  A Motor-boat Auction
    II  Some Lively Bidding
   III  A Timely Warning
    IV  Tom And Andy Clash
     V  A Test Of Speed
    VI  Towing Some Girls
   VII  A Brush With Andy
  VIII  Off On A Trip
    IX  Mr. Swift Is Alarmed
     X  A Cry For Help
    XI  A Quick Run
   XII  Suspicious Characters
  XIII  Tom In Danger
   XIV  The ARROW Disappears
    XV  A Damaging Statement
   XVI  Still On The Search
  XVII  "There She Is!"
 XVIII  The Pursuit
   XIX  A Quiet Cruise
    XX  News Of A Robbery
   XXI  The Balloon On Fire
  XXII  The Rescue
 XXIII  Plans For An Airship
  XXIV  The Mystery Solved
   XXV  Winning A Race




CHAPTER I

A MOTOR-BOAT AUCTION


"Where are you going, Tom?" asked Mr. Barton Swift of his son as the
young man was slowly pushing his motor-cycle out of the yard toward the
country road.  "You look as though you had some object in view."

"So I have, dad.  I'm going over to Lanton."

"To Lanton?  What for?"

"I want to have a look at that motor-boat."

"Which boat is that, Tom? I don't recall your speaking about a boat
over at Lanton.  What do you want to look at it for?"

"It's the motor-boat those fellows had who tried to get away with your
turbine model invention, dad.  The one they used at the old General
Harkness mansion, in the woods near the lake, and the same boat that
fellow used when he got away from me the day I was chasing him here."

"Oh, yes, I remember now.  But what is the boat doing over at Lanton?"

"That's where it belongs.  It's the property of Mr. Bently Hastings.
The thieves stole it from him, and when they ran away from the old
mansion, the time Mr. Damon and I raided the place, they left the boat
on the lake.  I turned it over to the county authorities, and they
found out it belonged to Mr. Hastings.  He has it back now, but I
understand it's somewhat damaged, and he wants to get rid of it.  He's
going to sell it at auction to-day, and I thought I'd go over and take
a look at it.  You see--"

"Yes, I see, Tom," exclaimed Mr. Swift with a laugh.  "I see what
you're aiming at.  You want a motor-boat, and you're going all around
Robin Hood's barn to get at it."

"No, dad, I only--"

"Oh, I know you, Tom, my lad!" interrupted the inventor, shaking his
finger at his son, who seemed somewhat confused.  "You have a nice
rowing skiff and a sailboat, yet you are hankering for a motor-boat.
Come now, own up.  Aren't you?"

"Well, dad, a motor-boat certainly would go fine on Lake Carlopa.
There's plenty of room to speed her, and I wonder there aren't more of
them.  I was going to see what Mr. Hastings' boat would sell for, but I
didn't exactly think of buying it' Still--"

"But you wouldn't buy a damaged boat, would you?"

"It isn't much damaged," and in his eagerness the young inventor (for
Tom Swift had taken out several patents) stood his motor-cycle up
against the fence and came closer to his father.  "It's only slightly
damaged," he went on. "I can easily fix it.  I looked it all over
before I gave it in charge of the authorities, and it's certainly a
fine boat. It's worth nine hundred dollars--or it was when it was new."

"That's a good deal of money for a boat," and Mr. Swift looked serious,
for though he was well off, he was inclined to be conservative.

"Oh, I shouldn't think of paying that much.  In fact, dad, I really had
no idea of bidding at the auction.  I only thought I'd go over and get
an idea of what the boat might sell for.  Perhaps some day--"

Tom paused.  Since his father had begun to question him some new plans
had come into the lad's head.  He looked at his parent and saw a smile
beginning to work around the corners of Mr. Swift's lips.  There was
also a humorous look in the eyes of the older inventor.  He understood
boys fairly well, even if he only had one, and he knew Tom perfectly.

"Would you really like to make a bid on that boat Tom?" he asked.

"Would I, dad? Well--" The youth did not finish, but his father knew
what he meant.

"I suppose a motor-boat would be a nice thing to have on Lake Carlopa,"
went on Mr. Swift musingly.  "You and I could take frequent trips in
it.  It isn't like a motor-cycle, only useful for one.  What do you
suppose the boat will go for, Tom?"

"I hardly know.  Not a high price, I believe, for motor-boats are so
new on our lake that few persons will take a chance on them.  But if
Mr. Hastings is getting another, he will not be so particular about
insisting on a high price for the old one.  Then, too, the fact that it
is damaged will help to keep the price down, though I know I can easily
put it in good shape.  I would like to make a bid, if you think it's
all right."

"Well, I guess you may, Tom, if you really want it.  You have money of
your own and a motor-boat is not a bad investment.  What do you think
ought to be the limit?"

"Would you consider a hundred and fifty dollars too high?"

Mr. Swift looked at Tom critically.  He was plainly going over several
matters in his mind, and not the least of them was the pluck his son
had shown in getting back some valuable papers and a model from a gang
of thieves.  The lad certainly was entitled to some reward, and to
allow him to get a boat might properly be part of it.

"I think you could safely go as high as two hundred dollars, Tom," said
Mr. Swift at length.  "That would be my limit on a damaged boat for it
might be better to pay a little more and get a new one.  However, use
your own judgment, but don't go over two hundred.  So the thieves who
made so much trouble for me stole that boat from Mr. Hastings, eh?"

"Yes, and they didn't take much care of it either.  They damaged the
engine, but the hull is in good shape.  I'm ever so glad you'll let me
bid on it.  I'll start right off.  The auction is at ten o'clock and I
haven't more than time to get there."

"Now be careful how you bid.  Don't raise your own figures, as I've
sometimes seen women, and men too, do in their excitement.  Somebody
may go over your head; and if he does, let them.  If you get the boat
I'll be very glad on your account.  But don't bring any of Anson
Morse's gang back in it with you.  I've seen enough of them."

"I'll not dad!" cried Tom as he trundled his motor-cycle out of the
gate and into the country road that led to the village of Shopton,
where he lived, and to Lanton, where the auction was to be held.  The
young inventor had not gone far before he turned back, leaving his
machine standing on the side path.

"What's the matter?" asked his father, who had started toward one of
several machine shops on the premises--shops where Mr. Swift and his
son did inventive work.

"Guess I'd better get a blank check and some money," replied Tom as he
entered the house.  "I'll need to pay a deposit if I secure the boat."

"That's so.  Well, good luck," and with his mind busy on a plan for a
new kind of storage battery, the inventor went on to his workroom.  Tom
got some cash and his checkbook from a small safe he owned and was soon
speeding over the road to Lanton, his motor-cycle making quite a cloud
of dust.  While he is thus hurrying along to the auction I will tell
you something about him.

Tom Swift, son of Barton Swift, lived with his father and a motherly
housekeeper, Mrs. Baggert, in a large house on the outskirts of the
town of Shopton, in New York State.  Mr. Swift had acquired
considerable wealth from his many inventions and patents, but he did
not give up working out his ideas simply because he had plenty of
money.  Tom followed in the footsteps of his parent and had already
taken out several patents.

Shortly before this story opens the youth had become possessed of a
motor-cycle in a peculiar fashion.  As told in the first volume of this
series, entitled "Tom Swift and His Motor-cycle," Tom was riding to the
town of Mansburg on an errand for his father one day when he was nearly
run down by a motorcyclist.  A little later the same motorcyclist, who
was a Mr. Wakefield Damon, of Waterfield, collided with a tree near
Tom's home and was severely cut and bruised, the machine being broken.
Tom and his father cared for the injured rider, and Mr. Damon, who was
an eccentric individual, was so disheartened by his attempts to ride
the motor-cycle that he sold it to Tom for fifty dollars, though it had
cost much more.

About the same time that Tom bought the motor-cycle a firm of rascally
lawyers, Smeak & Katch by name, had, in conjunction with several men,
made an attempt to get control of an invention of a turbine motor
perfected by Mr. Swift.  The men, who were Ferguson Appleson, Anson
Morse, Wilson Featherton, alias Simpson, and Jake Burke, alias Happy
Harry, who sometimes disguised himself as a tramp, tried several times
to steal the model.

Their anxiety to get it was due to the fact that they had invested a
large sum in a turbine motor invented by another man, but their motor
would not work and they sought to steal Mr. Swift's.  Tom was sent to
Albany on his motor-cycle to deliver the model and some valuable papers
to Mr. Crawford, of the law firm of Reid & Crawford, of Washington,
attorneys for Mr. Swift.  Mr. Crawford had an errand in Albany and had
agreed to meet Tom there with the model.

But, on the way, Tom was attacked by the gang of unscrupulous men and
the model was stolen.  He was assaulted and carried far away in an
automobile.  In an attempt to capture the gang in a deserted mansion,
in the woods on the shore of Lake Carlopa, Tom was aided by Mr. Damon,
of whom he had purchased the motor-cycle.  The men escaped, however,
and nothing could be done to punish them.

Tom was thinking of the exciting scenes he had passed through about a
month previous as he spun along the road leading to Lanton.

"I hope I don't meet Happy Harry or any of his gang to-day," mused the
lad as he turned on a little more power to enable his machine to mount
a hill.  "I don't believe they'll attend the auction, though.  It would
be too risky for them."

As Tom swung along at a rapid pace he heard, behind him, the puffing of
an automobile, with the muffler cut out.  He turned and cast a hasty
glance behind.

"I hope that ain't Andy Foger or any of his cronies," he said to
himself.  "He might try to run me down just for spite.  He generally
rushes along with the muffler open so as to attract attention and make
folks think he has a racing car."

It was not Andy, however, as Tom saw a little later, as a man passed
him in a big touring car.  Andy Foger, as my readers will recollect,
was a red-haired, squinty-eyed lad with plenty of money and not much
else.  He and his cronies, including Sam Snedecker, nearly ran Tom down
one day, when the latter was on his bicycle, as told in the first
volume of this series.  Andy had been off on a tour with his chums
during the time when Tom was having such strenuous adventures and had
recently returned.

"If I can only get that boat," mused Tom as he swung back into the
middle of the road after the auto had passed him, "I certainly will
have lots of fun.  I'll make a week's tour of Lake Carlopa and take dad
and Ned Newton with me." Ned was Tom's most particular chum, but as
young Newton was employed in the Shopton bank, the lad did not have
much time for pleasure.  Lake Carlopa was a large body of water, and it
would take a moderately powered boat several days to make a complete
circuit of the shore, so cut up into bays and inlets was it.

In about an hour Tom was at Lanton, and as he neared the home of Mr.
Hastings, which was on the shore of the lake, he saw quite a throng
going down toward the boathouse.

"There'll be some lively bidding," thought Tom as he got off his
machine and pushed it ahead of him through the drive and down toward
the river.  "I hope they don't go above two hundred dollars, though."

"Get out the way there!" called a sudden voice, and looking back, Tom
saw that an automobile had crept up silently behind him.  In it were
Andy Foger and Sam Snedecker.  "Why don't you get out the way?"
petulantly demanded the red-haired lad.

"Because I don't choose to," replied Tom calmly, knowing that Andy
would never dare to speed up his machine on the slope leading down to
the lake.

"Go ahead, bump him!" the young inventor heard Sam whisper.

"You'd better try it, if you want to get the best trouncing you ever
had!" cried Tom hotly.

"Hu! I s'pose you think you're going to bid on the boat?" sneered Andy.

"Is there any law against it?" asked Tom.

"Hu! Well, you'll not get it.  I'm going to take that boat," retorted
the squint-eyed bully.  "Dad gave me the money to get it."

"All right," answered Tom non-committally.  "Go ahead.  It's a free
country."

He stood his motor-cycle up against a tree and went toward a group of
persons who were surrounding the auctioneer.  The time had arrived to
start the sale.  As Tom edged in closer he brushed against a man who
looked at him sharply.  The lad was just wondering if he had ever seen
the individual before, as there seemed to be something strangely
familiar about him, when the man turned quickly away, as if afraid of
being recognized.

"That's odd," thought Tom, but he had no further time for speculation,
as the auctioneer was mounting on a soapbox and had begun to address
the gathering.




CHAPTER II

SOME LIVELY BIDDING


"Attention, people!" cried the auctioneer.  "Give me your attention for
a few minutes, and we will proceed with the business in hand.  As you
all know, I am about to dispose of a fine motor-boat, the property of
Mr. Bently Hastings.  The reason for disposing of it at auction is
known to most of you, but for the benefit of those who do not, I will
briefly state them.  The boat was stolen by a gang of thieves and
recovered recently through the efforts of a young man, Thomas Swift,
son of Barton Swift, our fellow-townsman, of Shopton." At that moment
the auctioneer, Jacob Wood, caught sight of Tom in the press, and,
looking directly at the lad, continued:

"I understand that young Mr. Swift is here to-day, and I hope he
intends to bid on this boat.  If he does, the bidding will be lively,
for Tom Swift is a lively young man.  I wish I could say that some of
the men who stole the boat were here to-day."

The auctioneer paused and there were some murmurs from those in the
throng as to why such a wish should be uttered.  Tom felt some one
moving near him, and, looking around, he saw the same man with whom he
had come in contact before.  The person seemed desirous of getting out
on the edge of the crowd, and Tom felt a return of his vague
suspicions.  He looked closely at the fellow, but could trace no
resemblance to any of the men who had so daringly stolen his father's
model.

"The reason I wish they were here to-day," went on Mr. Wood, "is that
the men did some slight damage to the boat, and if they were here
to-day we would make them pay for it.  However, the damage is slight
and can easily be repaired.  I mention that, as Mr. Hastings desired me
to.  Now we will proceed with the bidding, and I will say that an
opportunity will first be given all to examine the boat.  Perhaps Tom
Swift will give us his opinion on the state it is in as we know he is
well qualified to talk about machinery."

All eyes were turned on Tom, for many knew him.

"Humph! I guess I know as much about boats and motors as he does,"
sneered Andy Foger.  "He isn't the only one in this crowd! Why didn't
the auctioneer ask me?"

"Keep quiet," begged Sam Snedecker.  "People are laughing at you, Andy."

"I don't care if they are," muttered the sandy haired youth.  "Tom
Swift needn't think he's everything."

"If you will come down to the dock," went on the auctioneer, "you can
all see the boat, and I would be glad to have young Mr. Swift give us
the benefit of his advice."

The throng trooped down to the lake, and, blushing somewhat, Tom told
what was the matter with the motor and how it could be fixed.  It was
noticed that there was less enthusiasm over the matter than there had
been, for certainly the engine, rusty and out of order as it was, did
not present an attractive sight.  Tom noted that the man, who had acted
so strangely, did not come down to the dock.

"Guess he can't be much interested in the motor," decided Tom.

"Now then, if it's all the same to you folks, I'll proceed with the
auction here," went on Mr. Wood.  "You can all see the boat from here.
It is, as you see, a regular family launch and will carry twelve
persons comfortably.  With a canopy fitted to it a person could cruise
all about the lake and stay out over night, for you could sleep on the
seat cushions.  It is twenty-one feet in length and has a
five-and-a-half-foot beam, the design being what is known as a
compromise stern.  The motor is a double-cylinder two-cycle one, of ten
horsepower.  It has a float-feed carburetor, mechanical oiler, and the
ignition system is the jump-spark--the best for this style of motor.
The boat will make ten miles an hour, with twelve in, and, of course,
more than that with a lighter load.  A good deal will depend on the way
the motor is managed.

"Now, as you know, Mr. Hastings wishes to dispose of the boat partly
because he does not wish to repair it and partly because he has a newer
and larger one.  The craft, which is named CARLOPA by the way, cost
originally nine hundred dollars.  It could not be purchased new to-day,
in many places, for a thousand.  Now what am I offered in its present
condition? Will any one make an offer?  Will you give me five hundred
dollars?"

The auctioneer paused and looked critically at the throng.  Several
persons smiled.  Tom looked worried.  He had no idea that the price
would start so high.

"Well, perhaps that is a bit stiff," went on Mr. Wood.  "Shall we say
four hundred dollars? Come now, I'm sure it's worth four hundred.
Who'll start it at four hundred?"

No one would, and the auctioneer descended to three hundred, then to
two and finally, as if impatient, he called out:

"Well, will any one start at fifty dollars?"

Instantly there were several cries of "I will!"

"I thought you would," went on the auctioneer.  "Now we will get down
to work.  I'm offered fifty dollars for this twenty-one foot, ten
horsepower family launch.  Will any one make it sixty?"

"Sixty!" called out Andy Foger in a shrill voice.  Several turned to
look at him.

"I didn't know he was going to bid," thought Tom.  "He may go above me.
He's got plenty of money, and, while I have too, I'm not going to pay
too much for a damaged boat."

"Sixty I'm bid, sixty--sixty!" cried Mr. Wood in a sing-song tone,
"who'll make it seventy?"

"Sixty-five!" spoke a quiet voice at Tom's elbow, and he turned to see
the mysterious man who had joined the crowd at the edge of the lake.

"Sixty-five from the gentleman in the white straw hat!" called Mr. Wood
with a smile at his wit, for there were many men wearing white straw
hats, the day being a warm one in June.

"Here, who's bidding above me?" exclaimed Andy, as if it was against
the law.

"I guess you'll find a number going ahead of you, my young friend,"
remarked the auctioneer.  "Will you have the goodness not to interrupt
me, except when you want to bid?"

"Well, I offered sixty," said the squint-eyed bully, while his crony,
Sam Snedecker, was vainly, pulling at his sleeve.

"I know you did, and this gentleman went above you.  If you want to bid
more you can do so.  I'm offered sixty-five, sixty-five I'm offered for
this boat.  Will any one make it seventy-five?"

Mr. Wood looked at Tom, and our hero, thinking it was time for him to
make a bid, offered seventy. "Seventy from Tom Swift!" cried the
auctioneer. "There is a lad who knows a motor-boat from stem to stern,
if those are the right words. I don't know much about boats except what
I'm told, but Tom Swift does. Now, if he bids, you people ought to know
that it's all right. I'm bid seventy--seventy I'm bid. Will any one
make it eighty?"

"Eighty!" exclaimed Andy Foger after a whispered conference with Sam.
"I know as much about boats as Tom Swift.  I'll make it eighty."

"No side remarks. I'll do most of the talking. You just bid, young
man," remarked Mr. Wood. "I have eighty bid for this boat--eighty
dollars. Why, my friends, I can't understand this.  I ought to have it
up to three hundred dollars, at least. But I thank you all the same. We
are coming on. I'm bid eighty--"

"Ninety!" exclaimed the quiet man at Tom's elbow.  He was continually
fingering his upper lip, as though he had a mustache there, but his
face was clean-shaven.  He looked around nervously as he spoke.

"Ninety!" called out the auctioneer.

"Ninety-five!" returned Tom.  Andy Foger scowled at him, but the young
inventor only smiled.  It was evident that the bully did not relish
being bid against.  He and his crony whispered together again.

"One hundred!" called Andy, as if no one would dare go above that.

"I'm offered an even hundred," resumed Mr. Wood.  "We are certainly
coming on.  A hundred I am bid, a hundred--a hundred--a hundred--"

"And five," said the strange man hastily, and he seemed to choke as he
uttered the words.

"Oh, come now; we ought to have at least ten-dollar bids from now on,"
suggested Mr. Wood.  "Won't you make it a hundred and ten?" The
auctioneer looked directly at the man, who seemed to shrink back into
the crowd.  He shook his head, cast a sort of despairing look at the
boat and hurried away.

"That's queer," murmured Tom.  "I guess that was his limit, yet if he
wanted the boat badly that wasn't a high price."

"Who's going ahead of me?" demanded Andy in loud tones.

"Keep quiet!" urged Sam.  "We may get it yet."

"Yes, don't make so many remarks," counseled the auctioneer.  "I'm bid
a hundred and five.  Will any one make it a hundred and twenty-five?"

Tom wondered why the man had not remained to see if his bid was
accepted, for no one raised it at once, but he hurried off and did not
look back.  Tom took a sudden resolve.

"A hundred and twenty-five!" he called out.

"That's what I like to hear," exclaimed Mr. Wood.  "Now we are doing
business.  A hundred and twenty-five from Tom Swift.  Will any one
offer me fifty?"

Andy and Sam seemed to be having some dispute.

"Let's make him quit right now," suggested Andy in a hoarse whisper.

"You can't," declared Sam'

"Yes, I can.  I'll go up to my limit right now."

"And some one will go above you---maybe Tom will," was Sam's retort.

"I don't believe he can afford to," Andy came back with.  "I'm going to
call his bluffs.  I believe he's only bidding to make others think he
wants it.  I don't believe he'll buy it."

Tom heard what was said, but did not reply.  The auctioneer was calling
monotonously: "I'm bid a hundred and twenty-five--twenty-five.  Will
any one make it fifty?"

"A hundred and fifty!" sang out Andy, and all eyes were directed toward
him.

"Sixty!" said Tom quietly.

"Here, you--" began the red-haired lad.  "You--"

"That will do!" exclaimed the auctioneer sternly.  "I am offered a
hundred and sixty.  Now who will give me an advance? I want to get the
boat up to two hundred, and then the real bidding will begin."

Tom's heart sank.  He hoped it would be some time before a two hundred
dollar offer would be heard.  As for Andy Foger, he was almost
speechless with rage.  He shook off the restraining arm of Sam, and,
worming his way to the front of the throng, exclaimed:

"I'll give a hundred and seventy-five dollars for that boat!"

"Good!" cried the auctioneer.  "That's the way to talk.  I'm offered a
hundred and seventy-five."

"Eighty," said Tom quietly, though his heart was beating fast.

"Well, of all--" began Andy, but Sam Snedecker dragged him back.

"You haven't got any more money," said the bully's crony.  "Better stop
now."

"I will not! I'm going home for more," declared Andy.  "I must have
that boat."

"It will be sold when you get back," said Sam.

"Haven't you got any money you can lend me?" inquired the squint-eyed
one, scowling in Tom's direction.  "No, not a bit.  There, some one
raised Tom's bid."

At that moment a man in the crowd offered a hundred and eighty-one
dollars.

"Small amounts thankfully received," said Mr. Wood with a laugh.  Then
the bidding became lively, a number making one-dollar advances.

The price got up to one hundred and ninety-five dollars and there it
hung for several minutes, despite the eloquence of Mr. Wood, who tried
by all his persuasive powers to get a substantial advance.  But every
one seemed afraid to bid.  As for the young inventor, he was in a
quandary.  He could only offer five dollars more, and, if he bid it in
a lump, some one might go to two hundred and five, and he would not get
the boat.  He wished he had secured permission from his father to go
higher, yet he knew that as a fair proposition two hundred dollars was
about all the motor-boat in its present condition was worth, at least
to him.  Then he made a sudden resolve.  He thought he might as well
have the suspense over.

"Two hundred dollars!" he called boldly.

"I'm offered two hundred!" repeated Mr. Wood.  "That is something like
it.  Now who will raise that?"

There was a moment of silence.  Then the auctioneer swung into an
enthusiastic description of the boat.  He begged for an advance, but
none was made, though Tom's heart seemed in his throat, so afraid was
he that he would not get the CARLOPA.

"Two hundred--two hundred!" droned on Mr. Wood. "I am offered two
hundred. Will any of you go any higher?" He paused a moment, and Tom's
heart beat harder than ever. "If not," resumed the speaker, "I will
declare the bidding closed. Are you all done?  Once--twice--three
times. Two hundred dollars. Going--going--gone!" He clapped his hands.
"The boat is sold to Thomas Swift for two hundred dollars. If he'll
step up I'll take his money."

There was a laugh as Tom, blushingly, advanced.  He passed Andy Foger,
who had worked his way over near him.

"You got the boat," sneered the bully, "and I s'pose you think you got
ahead of me."

"Keep quiet!" begged Sam.

"I won't!" exclaimed Andy.  "He outbid me just out of spite, and I'll
get even with him.  You see if I don't!"

Tom looked Andy Foger straight in the eyes, but did not answer, and the
red-haired youth turned aside, followed by his crony, and started
toward his automobile.

"I congratulate you on your bargain," said Mr. Wood as Tom proceeded to
make out a check.  He gave little thought to the threat Andy Foger had
made, but the time was coming when he was to remember it well.




CHAPTER III

A TIMELY WARNING


"Well, are you satisfied with your bargain, Tom?" asked Mr. Wood when
the formalities about transferring the ownership of the motor-boat had
been completed.

"Oh, yes, I calculated to pay just what I did."

"I'm glad you're satisfied, for Mr. Hastings told me to be sure the
purchaser was satisfied.  Here he comes now.  I guess he wasn't at the
auction."

An elderly gentleman was approaching Mr. Wood and Tom.  Most of the
throng was dispersing, but the young inventor noticed that Andy Foger
and Sam Snedecker stood to one side, regarding him closely.

"So you got my boat," remarked the former owner of the craft.  "I hope
you will be able to fix it up."

"Oh, I think I shall," answered the new owner of the CARLOPA.  "If I
can't, father will help me."

"Yes, you have an advantage there.  Are you going to keep the same
name?" and Mr. Hastings seemed quite interested in what answer the lad
would make.

"I think not," replied Tom.  "It's a good name, but I want something
that tells more what a fast boat it is, for I'm going to make some
changes that will increase the speed."

"That's a good idea. Call it the Swift."

"Folks would say I was stuck up if I did that," retorted the youth
quickly.  "I think I shall call it the ARROW.  That's a good, short
name, and--"

"It's certainly speedy," interrupted Mr. Hastings.  "Well now, since
you're not going to use the name CARLOPA, would you mind if I took it
for my new boat? I have a fancy for it."

"Not in the least," said Tom.  "Don't you want the letters from each
side of the bow to put on your new craft?"

"It's very kind of you to offer them, and, since you will have no need
for them, I'll be glad to take them off."

"Come down to my boat," invited Tom, using the word "my" with a proper
pride, "and I'll take off the brass letters.  I have a screw driver in
my motor-cycle tool bag."

As the former and present owners of the ARROW (which is the name by
which I shall hereafter designate Tom's motor-boat) walked down toward
the dock where it was moored the young inventor gave a startled cry.

"What's the matter?" asked Mr. Hastings.

"That man! See him at my motor-boat?" cried Tom.  He pointed to the
craft in the lake.  A man was in the cockpit and seemed to be doing
something to the forward bulkhead, which closed off the compartment
holding the gasoline tank.

"Who is he?" asked Mr. Hastings, while Tom started on a run toward the
boat.

"I don't know.  Some man who bid on the boat at the auction, but who
didn't go high enough," answered the lad.  As he neared the craft the
man sprang out, ran along the lakeshore for a short distance and then
disappeared amid the bushes which bordered the estate of Mr. Hastings.
Tom hurriedly entered the ARROW.

"Did he do any damage?" asked Mr. Hastings.

"I guess he didn't have time," responded Tom.  "But he was tampering
with the lock on the door of the forward compartment.  What's in there?"

"Nothing but the gasoline tank.  I keep the bulkhead sliding door
locked on general principles.  I can't imagine what the fellow would
want to open it for.  There's nothing of value in there.  Perhaps he
isn't right in his head.  Was he a tramp?"

"No, he was well dressed but he seemed very nervous during the auction,
as if he was disappointed not to have secured the boat.  Yet what could
he want in that compartment? Have you the key to the lock, Mr.
Hastings?"

"Yes, it belongs to you now, Mr. Swift," and the former owner handed it
to Tom, who quickly unlocked the compartment.  He slid back the door
and peered within, but all he saw was the big galvanized tank.

"Nothing in there he could want," commented the former owner of the
craft.

"No," agreed Tom in a low voice.  "I don't see what he wanted to open
the door for." But the time was to come, and not far off, when Tom was
to discover quite a mystery connected with the forward compartment of
his boat, and the solution of it was fated to bring him into no little
danger.

"It certainly is odd," went on Mr. Hastings when, after Tom had secured
the screw driver from his motor-cycle tool bag, he aided the lad in
removing the letters from the bow of the boat "Are you sure you don't
know the man?"

"No, I never saw him before.  At first I thought his voice sounded like
one of the members of the Happy Harry gang, but when I looked squarely
at him I could not see a bit of resemblance.  Besides, that gang would
not venture again into this neighborhood."

"No, I imagine not.  Perhaps he was only a curious, meddlesome person.
I have frequently been bothered by such individuals.  They want to see
all the working parts of an automobile or motor-boat, and they don't
care what damage they do by investigating."

Tom did not reply, but he was pretty certain that the man in question
had more of an object than mere curiosity in tampering with the boat.
However, he could discover no solution just then, and he proceeded with
the work of taking off the letters.

"What are you going to do with your boat, now that you have it?" asked
Mr. Hastings.  "Can you run it down to your dock in the condition in
which it is now?"

"No, I shall have to go back home, get some tools and fix up the motor.
It will take half a day, at least.  I will come back this afternoon
and, have the boat at my house by night.  That is if I may leave it at
your dock here."

"Certainly, as long as you like."

The young inventor had many things to think about as he rode toward
home, and though he was somewhat puzzled over the actions of the
stranger, he forgot about that in anticipating the pleasure he would
have when the motor-boat was in running order.

"I'll take dad off on a cruise about the lake," he decided.  "He needs
a rest, for he's been working hard and worrying over the theft of the
turbine motor model.  I'll take Ned Newton for some rides, too, and he
can bring his camera along and get a lot of pictures.  Oh, I'll have
some jolly sport this summer!"

Tom was riding swiftly along a quiet country road and was approaching a
steep hill, which he could not see until he was close to it, owing to a
sharp turn.

As he was about to swing around it and coast swiftly down the steep
declivity he was startled by hearing a voice calling to him from the
bushes at the side of the road.

"Hold on, dar! hold on, Mistah Swift!" cried a colored man, suddenly
popping into view.  "Doan't go down dat hill."

"Why, it's Eradicate Sampson!" exclaimed Tom, quickly shutting off the
power and applying the brakes.  "What's the matter, Rad? Why shouldn't
I go down that hill?"

"Beca'se, Mistah Swift, dere's a pow'ful monstrous tree trunk right
across de road at a place whar yo' cain't see it till yo' gits right on
top ob it.  Ef yo' done hit dat ar tree on yo' lickity-split machine,
yo' suah would land in kingdom come.  Doan't go down dat hill!"

Tom leaped off his machine and approached the colored man.  Eradicate
Sampson did odd jobs in the neighborhood of Shopton, and more than once
Tom had done him favors in repairing his lawn mower or his wood-sawing
machine.  In turn Eradicate had given Tom a valuable clue as to the
hiding place of the model thieves.

"How'd the log get across the road, Rad?" asked Tom.

"I dunno, Mistah Swift.  I see it when I come along wid mah mule,
Boomerang, an' I tried t' git it outer de way, but I couldn't.  Den I
left Boomerang an' mah wagon at de foot ob de hill an' I come up heah
t' git a long pole t' pry de log outer de way.  I didn't t'ink nobody
would come along, case dis road ain't much trabeled."

"I took it for a short cut," said the lad.  "Come on, let's take a look
at the log."

Leaving his machine at the top of the slope, the young inventor
accompanied the colored man 'down the hill.  At the foot of it, well
hidden from sight of any one who might come riding down, was a big log.
It was all the way across the road.

"That never fell there," exclaimed Tom in some excitement.  "That never
rolled off a load of logs, even if there had been one along, which
there wasn't.  That log was put there!"

"Does yo' t'ink dat, Mistah Swift?" asked Eradicate, his eyes getting
big.

"I certainly do, and, if you hadn't warned me, I might have been
killed."

"Oh, I heard yo' lickity-split machine chug-chuggin' along when I were
in de bushes, lookin' for a pryin' pole, an' I hurried out to warn yo.
I knowed I could leave Boomerang safe, 'case he's asleep."

"I'm glad you did warn me," went on the youth solemnly.  Then, as he
went closer to the log, he uttered an exclamation.

"That has been dragged here by an automobile!" he cried.  "It's been
done on purpose to injure some one.  Come on, Rad, let's see if we
can't find out who did it."

Something on the ground caught Tom's eye.  He stooped and picked up a
nickle-plated wrench.

"This may come in handy as evidence," he murmured.




CHAPTER IV

TOM AND ANDY CLASH


Even a casual observer could have told that an auto had had some part
in dragging the log to the place where it blockaded the road.  In the
dust were many marks of the big rubber tires and even the imprint of a
rope, which had been used to tow the tree trunk.

"What fo' yo' t'ink any one put dat log dere?" asked the colored man as
he followed Tom.  Boomerang, the mule, so called because Eradicate said
you never could tell what he was going to do, opened his eyes lazily
and closed them again.  "I don't know why, Rad, unless they wanted to
wreck an automobile or a wagon.  Maybe tramps did it for spite."

"Maybe some one done it to make yo' hab trouble, Mistah Swift."

"No, I hardly think so.  I don't know of any one who would want to make
trouble for me, and how would they know I was coming this way--"

Tom suddenly checked himself.  The memory of the scene at the auction
came back to him and he recalled what Andy Foger had said about
"'getting even."

"Which way did dat auto go?" resumed Eradicate.

"It came from down the road," answered Tom, not completing the sentence
he had left unfinished.  "They dragged the log up to the foot of the
hill and left it.  Then the auto went down this way." It was
comparatively easy, for a lad of such sharp observation as was Tom, to
trace the movements of the vehicle.

"Den if it's down heah, maybe we cotch 'em," suggested the colored man.

The young inventor did not answer at once.  He was hurrying along, his
eyes on the telltale marks.  He had proceeded some distance from the
place where the log was when he uttered a cry.  At the same moment he
hurried from the road toward a thick clump of bushes that were in the
ditch alongside of the highway.  Reaching them, he parted the leaves
and called:

"Here's the auto, Rad!"

The colored man ran up, his eyes wider open than ever.  There, hidden
amid the bushes, was a large touring car.

"Whose am dat?" asked Eradicate.

Tom did not answer.  He penetrated the underbrush, noting where the
broken branches had been bent upright after the forced entrance of the
car, the better to hide it.  The young inventor was, seeking some clew
to discover the owner of the machine.  To this end he climbed up in the
tonneau and was looking about when some one burst in through the screen
of bushes and a voice cried: "Here, you get out of my car!"

"Oh, is it your car, Andy Foger?" asked Tom calmly as he recognized his
squint-eyed rival.  "I was just beginning to think it was.  Allow me to
return your wrench," and he held out the one he had picked up near the
log.  "The next time you drag trees across the road," went on the lad
in the tonneau, facing the angry and dismayed Andy, "I'd advise you to
post a notice at the top of the hill, so persons riding down will not
be injured."

"Notice--road--hill--logs!" stammered Andy, turning red under his
freckles.

"That's what I said," replied Tom coolly.

"I--I didn't have anything to do with putting a log across any road,"
mumbled the bully.  "I--I've been off toward the creek."

"Have you?" asked Tom with a peculiar smile.

"I thought you might have been looking for the wrench you dropped near
the log.  You should be more careful and so should Sam Snedecker, who's
hiding outside the bushes," went on our hero, for he had caught sight
of the form of Andy's crony.  "I--I told him not to do it!" exclaimed
Sam as he came from his hiding place.

"Shut up!" exclaimed Andy desperately.

"Oh, I think I know your secret," continued the young inventor.  "You
wanted to get even with me for outbidding you on the motor-boat.  You
watched which road I took, and then, in your auto, you came a shorter
way, ahead of me.  You hauled the log across the foot of the hill,
hoping, I suppose, that my machine would be broken.  But, let me tell
you, it was a risky trick.  Not only might I have been killed, but so
would whoever else who happened to drive down the slope over the log,
whether in a wagon or automobile.  Fortunately Eradicate discovered it
in time and warned me.  I ought to have you arrested, but you're not
worth it.  A good thrashing is what such sneaks as you deserve!"

"You haven't got any evidence against us," sneered Andy confidently,
his old bravado coming back.

"I have all I want," replied Tom.  "You needn't worry.  I'm not going
to tell the police.  But you've got to do one thing or I'll make you
sorry you ever tried this trick.  Eradicate will help me, so don't
think you're going to escape."

"You get out of my automobile!" demanded Andy.  "I'll have you arrested
if you don't."

"I'll get out because I'm ready to, but not on account of your
threats," retorted Mr. Swift's son.  "Here's your wrench.  Now I want
you and Sam to start up this machine and haul that log out of the way."

"S'pose I won't do it?" snapped Andy.

"Then I'll cause your arrest, besides thrashing you into the bargain!
You can take your choice of removing the log so travelers can pass or
having a good hiding, you and Sam.  Eradicate, you take Sam and I'll
tackle Andy."

"Don't you dare touch me!" cried the bully, but there was a whine in
his tones.

"You let me alone or I'll tell my father!" added Sam.  "I--I didn't
have nothin' to do with it, anyhow.  I told Andy it would make trouble,
but he made me help him."

"Say, what's the matter with you?" demanded Andy indignantly of his
crony.  "Do you want to--"

"I wish I'd never come with you," went on Sam, who was beginning to be
frightened.

"Come now.  Start up that machine and haul the log out of the way,"
demanded Tom again.

"I won't do it!" retorted the red-haired lad impudently.

"Yes, you will," insisted our hero, and he took a step toward the
bully.  They were out of the clump of bushes now and in the roadside
ditch.  "You let me alone," almost screamed Andy, and in his baffled
rage he rushed at Tom, aiming a blow.

The young inventor quickly stepped to one side, and, as the bully
passed him, Tom sent out a neat left-hander.  Andy Foger went down in a
heap on the grass.




CHAPTER V

A TEST OF SPEED


Whether Tom or Andy was the most surprised at the happening would be
hard to say.  The former had not meant to hit so hard and he certainly
did not intend to knock the squint-eyed youth down.  The latter's fall
was due, as much as anything, to his senseless, rushing tactics and to
the fact that he slipped on the green grass.  The bully was up in a
moment, however, but he knew better than to try conclusions with Tom
again.  Instead he stood out of reach and spluttered:

"You just wait, Tom Swift! You just wait!"

"Well, I'm waiting," responded the other calmly.

"I'll get even with you," went on Andy.  "You think you're smart
because you got ahead of me, but I'll get square!"

"Look here!" burst out the young inventor determinedly, taking a step
toward his antagonist, at which Andy quickly retreated, "I don't want
any more of that talk from you, Andy Foger.  That's twice you've made
threats against me to-day.  You put that log across the road, and if
you try anything like it for your second attempt I'll make you wish you
hadn't.  That applies to you, too, Sam," he added, glancing at the
other lad.

"I--I ain't gone' to do nothin'," declared Sam.

"I told Andy not to put that tree--"

"Keep still, can't you!" shouted the bully.  "Come on.  We'll get even
with him, that's all," he muttered as he went back into the bushes
where the auto was.  Andy cranked up and he and his crony getting into
the car were about to start off.

"Hold on!" cried Tom.  "You'll take that log from across the road or
I'll have you arrested for obstructing traffic, and that's a serious
offense."

"I'm goin' to take it away!" growled Andy.  "Give a fellow a show can't
you?"

He cast an ugly look at Tom, but the latter only smiled.  It was no
easy task for Sam and Andy to pull the log out of the way, as they
could hardly lift it to slip the rope under.  But they finally managed
it, and, by the power of the car, hauled it to one side.  Then they
speed off.

"I 'clar t' gracious, dem young fellers am most as mean an' contrary as
mah mule Boomerang am sometimes," observed Eradicate.  "Only Boomerang
ain't quite so mean as dat."

"I should hope not, Rad," observed Tom.  "I'm ever so much obliged for
your warning.  I guess I'll be getting, home now.  Come around next
week; we have some work for you."

"'Deed an' I will," replied the colored man.  "I'll come around an'
eradicate all de dirt on yo' place, Mistah Swift.  Yais, sah, I's
Eradicate by name, and dat's my perfession--eradicatin' dirt.  Much
obleeged, I'll call around.  Giddap, Boomerang!"

The mule lazily flicked his ears, but did not stir, and Tom, knowing
the process of arousing the animal would take some time, hurried up the
hill to where he had left his motor-cycle.  Eradicate was still engaged
on the task of trying to arouse his steed to a sense of its duty when
the young inventor flashed by on his way home.

"So now you own a broken motor-boat," observed Mr. Swift when Tom had
related the circumstances of the auction.  "Well, now you have it, what
are you going to do with it?"

"Fix it, first of all," replied his son.  "It needs considerable
tinkering up, but nothing but what I can do, if you'll help me."

"Of course I will.  Do you think you can get any speed out of it?"

"Well, I'm not so anxious for speed.  I want a good, comfortable boat,
and the ARROW will be that.  I've named it, you see.  I'm going back to
Lanton this afternoon, take some tools along, and repair it so I can
run the boat over to here.  Then I'll get at it and fix it up.  I've
got a plan for you, dad."

"What is it?" asked the inventor, his rather tired face lighting up
with interest.

"I'm going to take you on a vacation trip."

"A vacation trip?"

"Yes, you need a rest.  You've been working too hard over that
gyroscope invention."

"Yes, Tom, I think I have," admitted Mr. Swift.  "But I am very much
interested in it, and I think I can get it to work.  If I do it will
make a great difference in the control of aeroplanes.  It will make
them more stable and able to fly in almost any wind.  But I certainly have
puzzled my brains over some features of it.  However, I don't quite see
what you mean."

"You need a rest, dad," said Mr. Swift's son kindly.  "I want you to
forget all about patents, invention, machinery and even the gyroscope
for a week or two.  When I get my motor-boat in shape I'm going to take
you and Ned Newton up the lake for a cruise.  We can camp out, or, if
we had to, we could sleep in the boat.  I'm going to put a canopy on it
and arrange some bunks.  It will do you good and perhaps new ideas for
your gyroscope may come to you after a rest."

"Perhaps they will, Tom.  I am certainly tired enough to need a
vacation.  It's very kind of you to think of me in connection with your
boat.  But if you're going to get it this afternoon you'd better start
if you expect to get back by night.  I think Mrs. Baggert has dinner
ready."

After the meal Tom selected a number of tools from his own particular
machine shop and carried them down to the dock on the lake, where his
two small boats were tied.

"Aren't you going back on your motor-cycle?" asked his father.

"No, Dad, I'm going to row over to Lanton, and, if I can get the ARROW
fixed, I'll tow my rowboat back."

"Very well, then you won't be in any danger from Andy Foger.  I must
speak to his father about him."

"No, dad, don't," exclaimed the young inventor quickly.  "I can fight
my own battles with Andy.  I don't fancy he will bother me again right
away."

Tom found it more of a task than he had anticipated to get the motor in
shape to run the ARROW back under her own power.  The magneto was out
of order and the batteries needed renewing, while the spark coil had
short-circuited and took considerable time to adjust.  But by using
some new dry cells, which Mr. Hastings gave him, and cutting out the
magneto, or small dynamo which produces the spark that exploded the
gasoline in the cylinders, Tom soon had a fine, "fat" hot spark from
the auxiliary ignition system.  Then, adjusting the timer and throttle
on the engine and seeing that the gasoline tank was filled, the lad
started up his motor.  Mr. Hastings helped him, but after a few turns
of the flywheel there were no explosions.  Finally, after the
carburetor (which is the device where gasoline is mixed with air to
produce an explosive mixture) had been adjusted, the motor started off
as if it had intended to do so all the while and was only taking its
time about it.

"The machine doesn't run as smooth as it ought to," commented Mr.
Hastings.  "No, it needs a thorough overhauling," agreed the owner of
the ARROW.  "I'll get at it to-morrow," and with that he swung out into
the lake, towing his rowboat after him.

"A motor-boat of my own!" exulted Tom as he twirled the steering wheel
and noted how readily the craft answered her helm.  "This is great!"

He steered down the lake and then, turning around, went up it a mile or
more before heading for his own dock, as he wanted to see how the
engine behaved.

"With some changes and adjustments I can make this a speedy boat,"
thought Tom.  "I'll get right at it.  I shouldn't wonder if I could
make a good showing against Mr. Hastings' new CARLOPA, though his
boat's got four cylinders and mine has but two."

The lad was proceeding leisurely along the lakeshore, near his home,
with the motor throttled down to test it at low speed, when he heard
some one shout.  Looking toward the bank, Tom saw a man waving his
hands.

"I wonder what he wants?" thought our hero as he put the wheel over to
send his craft to shore.  He heard a moment later, for the man on the
bank cried:

"I say, my young friend, do you know anything about automobiles?  Of
course you do or you wouldn't be running a motor-boat.  Bless my very
existence, but I'm in trouble!  My machine has stopped on a lonely road
and I can't seem to get it started.  I happened to hear your boat and I
came here to hail you.  Bless my coat-pockets but I am in trouble!  Can
you help me?  Bless my soul and gizzard!"

"Mr. Damon!" exclaimed Tom, shutting off the power, for he was now near
shore.  "Of course I'll help you, Mr. Damon," for the young inventor
had recognized the eccentric man of whom he had purchased the
motor-cycle and who had helped him in rounding up the thieves.

"Why, bless my shoe-laces, if it isn't Tom Swift!" exclaimed Mr. Damon,
who seemed very fond of calling down blessings upon himself or upon
articles of his dress or person.

"Yes! I'm here," admitted Tom with a laugh.

"And in a motor-boat, too! Bless my pocketbook, but did that run away
with some one who sold it to you cheap?"

"No, not exactly," and the lad explained how he had come into
possession of it.  By this time he was ashore and had tied the ARROW to
an overhanging tree.  Then Tom proceeded to where Mr. Damon had left
his stalled automobile.  The eccentric man was wealthy and his
physician had instructed him to ride about in the car for his health.
Tom soon located the trouble.  The carburetor had become clogged, and
it was soon in working order again.

"Well, now that you have a boat, I don't suppose you will be riding
about the country so much," commented Mr. Damon as he got into his car.
"Bless my spark-plug! But if you ever get over to Waterfield, where I
live, come and see me.  It's handy to get to by water."

"I'll come some day," promised the lad.

"Bless my hat band, but I hope so," went on the eccentric individual as
he prepared to start his car.

Tom completed the remainder of the trip to his house without incident
and his father came down to the dock to see the motor-boat.  He agreed
with his son that it was a bargain and that it could easily be put in
fine shape.

The youth spent all the next day and part of the following working on
the craft.  He overhauled the ignition system, which was the jump-spark
style, cleaned the magneto and adjusted the gasoline and compression
taps so that they fitted better.  Then he readjusted the rudder lines,
tightening them on the steering wheel, and looked over the piping from
the gasoline tank.

The tank was in the forward compartment, and, upon inspecting this, the
lad concluded to change the plan by which the big galvanized iron box
was held in place.  He took out the old wooden braces and set them
closer together, putting in a few new ones.

"The tank will not vibrate so when I'm going at full speed," he
explained to his father.

"Is that where the strange man was tampering with the lock the day of
the auction?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Yes, but I don't see what he could want in this compartment, do you
dad?"

The inventor got into the boat and looked carefully into the rather
dark space where the tank fitted.  He went over every inch of it, and,
pointing to one of the thick wooden blocks that supported the tank,
asked:

"Did you bore that hole in there, Tom?"

"No, it was there before I touched the braces.  But it isn't a hole, or
rather, someone bored it and stopped it up again.  It doesn't weaken
the brace any."

"No, I suppose not.  I was just wondering whether that was one of the
new blocks or an old one."

"Oh, an old one.  I'm going to paint them, too, so in case the water
leaks in or the gasoline leaks out the wood won't be affected.  A
gasoline tank should vibrate as little as possible, if you don't want
it to leak.  I guess I'll paint the whole interior of this compartment
white, then I can see away into the far corners of it."

"I think that's a good idea," commented Mr. Swift.

It was four days after his purchase of the boat before Tom was ready to
make a long trip in it.  Up to that time he had gone on short spins not
far from the dock, in order to test the engine adjustment.  The lad
found it was working very well, but he decided with a new kind of spark
plugs for the two cylinders that he could get more speed out of it.
Finally the forward compartment was painted and a general overhauling
given the hull and Tom was ready to put his boat to a good test.

"Come on, Ned," he said to his chum early one evening after Mr. Swift
had said he was too tired to go out on a trial run.  "We'll see what
the ARROW will do now."

From the time Tom started up the motor it was evident that the boat was
going through the water at a rapid rate.  For a mile or more the two
lads speeded along, enjoying it hugely.  Then Ned exclaimed:

"Something's coming behind us."

Tom turned his head and looked.  Then he called out:

"It's Mr. Hastings in his new CARLOPA.  I wonder if he wants a race?"

"Guess he'd have it all his own way," suggested Ned.

"Oh, I don't know.  I can get a little more speed out of my boat."

Tom waited until the former owner of the ARROW was up to him.

"Want a race?" asked Mr. Hastings good-naturedly.

"Sure!" agreed Tom, and he shoved the timer ahead to produce quicker
explosions.

The ARROW seemed to leap forward and for a moment was ahead of the
CARLOPA, but with a motion of his hand to the spark lever Mr. Hastings
also increased his speed.  For a moment the two boats were on even
terms and then the larger and newer one forged ahead.  Tom had expected
it, but he was a little disappointed.

"That's doing first rate," complimented Mr. Hastings as he passed them.
"Better than I was ever able to make her do even when she was new, Tom."

This made the present owner of the ARROW feel somewhat consoled.  He
and Ned ran on for a few miles, the CARLOPA in the meanwhile
disappearing from view around a bend.  Then Tom and his chum turned
around and made for the Swift dock.

"She certainly is a dandy!" declared Ned.  "I wish I had one like it."

"Oh, I intend that you shall have plenty of rides in this," went on his
friend.  "When you get your vacation, you and dad and I are going on a
tour," and he explained his plan, which, it is needless to say, met
with Ned's hearty approval.

Just before going to bed, some hours later, Tom decided to go down to
the dock to make sure he had shut off the gasoline cock leading from
the tank of his boat to the motor.  It was a calm, early summer night,
with a new moon giving a little light, and the lad went down to the
lake in his slippers.  As he neared the boathouse he heard a noise.

"Water rat," he murmured, "or maybe muskrats.  I must set some traps."

As Tom entered the boathouse he started back in alarm, for a bright
light flashed up, almost in his eyes.

"Who's here?" he cried, and at that moment someone sprang out of his
motor-boat, scrambled into a rowing craft which the youth could dimly
make out in front of the dock and began to pull away quickly.

"Hold on there!" cried the young inventor. "Who are you?  What do you
want?  Come back here!"

The person in the 'coat returned no answer.  With his heart doing beats
over-time Tom lighted a lantern and made a hasty examination of the
ARROW.  It did not appear to have been harmed, but a glance showed that
the door of the gasoline compartment had been unlocked and was open.
Tom jumped down into his craft.

"Some one has been at that compartment again!" he murmured.  "I wonder
if it was the same man who acted so suspiciously at the auction?  What
can his object be, anyhow?"

The next moment he uttered an exclamation of startled surprise and
picked up something from the bottom of the boat.  It was a bunch of
keys, with a tag attached, bearing the owner's name.

"Andy Foger!" murmured Tom.  "So this is, how he was trying to get
even!  Maybe he started to put a hole in the tank or in my boat."




CHAPTER VI

TOWING SOME GIRLS


With a sense of anger mingled with an apprehension lest some harm
should have been done to his craft, the owner of the ARROW went
carefully over it.  He could find nothing wrong.  The engine was all
right and all that appeared to have been accomplished by the unbidden
visitor was the opening of the locked forward compartment.  That this
had been done by one of the many keys on Andy Foger's ring was evident.

"Now what could have been his object?" mused Tom.  "I should think if
he wanted to put a hole in the boat he would have done it amidships,
where the water would have a better chance to come in, or perhaps he
wanted to flood it with gasoline and--"

The idea of fire was in Tom's mind, and he did not finish his
half-completed thought.

"That may have been it," he resumed after a hasty examination of the
gasoline tank, to make sure there were no leaks in it.  "To get even
with me for outbidding him on the boat, Andy may have wanted to destroy
the ARROW.  Well, of all the mean tricks, that's about the limit!  But
wait until I see him.  I've got evidence against him," and Tom looked
at the key ring.  "I could almost have him arrested for this."

Going outside the boathouse, Tom stood on the edge of the dock and
peered into the darkness.  He could hear the faint sound of someone
rowing across the lake, but there was no light.

"He had one of those electric flash lanterns," decided Tom.  "If I
hadn't found his keys, I might have thought it was Happy Harry instead
of Andy."

The young inventor went back into the house after carefully locking the
boat compartment and detaching from the engine an electrical device,
without which the motor in the ARROW could not be started.

"That will prevent them from running away with my boat, anyhow,"
decided Tom.  "And I'll tell Garret Jackson to keep a sharp watch
to-night." Jackson was the engineer at Mr. Swift's workshop.

Tom told his father of the happening and Mr. Swift was properly
indignant.  He wanted to go at once to see Mr. Foger and complain of
Andy's act, but Tom counseled waiting.

"I'll attend to Andy myself," said the young inventor.  "He's getting
desperate, I guess, or he wouldn't try to set the place on fire.  But
wait until I show him these keys."

Bright and early the next morning the owner of the motor-boat was down
to the dock inspecting it.  The engineer, who had been on watch part of
the night, reported that there had been no disturbance, and Tom found
everything all right.  "I wonder if I'd better go over and accuse Andy
now or wait until I see him and spring this evidence on him?" thought
our hero.  Then he decided it would be better to wait.  He took the
ARROW out after breakfast, his father going on a short spin with him.

"But I must go back now and work on my gyroscope invention," said Mr.
Swift when about two hours had been spent on the lake.  "I am making
good progress with it."

"You need a vacation," decided Tom, "I'll be ready to take you and Ned
in about two weeks.  He will have two weeks off then and, we'll have
some glorious times together."

That afternoon Tom put some new style spark plugs in the cylinders of
his motor and found that he had considerably increased the revolutions
of the engine, due to a better explosion being obtained.  He also made
some minor adjustments and the next day he went out alone for a long
run.

Heading up the lake, Tom was soon in sight of a popular excursion
resort that was frequently visited by church and Sunday-school
organizations in the vicinity of Shopton.  The lad saw a number of
rowing craft and a small motor-boat circling around opposite the resort
and remarked: "There must be a picnic at the grove to-day.  Guess I'll
run up and take a look."

The lad was soon in the midst of quite a flotilla of rowboats, most of
them manned by pretty girls or in charge of boys who were giving
sisters (their own or some other chap's) a trip on the water.  Tom
throttled his boat down to slow speed and looked with pleasure on the
pretty scene.  His boat attracted considerable attention, for motor
craft were not numerous on Lake Carlopa.

As our hero passed a boat, containing three very pretty young ladies,
Tom heard one of them exclaim:

"There he is now!  That's Tom Swift."

Something in the tones of the voice attracted his attention.  He turned
and saw a brown-eyed girl smiling at him.  She bowed and asked,
blushing the while:

"Well, have you caught any more runaway horses lately?"

"Runaway horses--why--what?  Oh, it's Miss Nestor!" exclaimed the lad,
recognizing the young lady whose steed he had frightened one day when
he was on his bicycle.  As told in the first volume of this series, the
horse had run away, being alarmed at the flashing of Tom's wheel, and
Miss Mary Nestor, of Mansburg, was in grave danger.

"So you've given up the bicycle for the motor-boat," went on the young
lady.

"Yes," replied Tom with a smile, shutting off the power, "and I haven't
had a chance to save any girls since I've had it."

The two boats had drifted close together, and Miss Nestor introduced
her two companions to Tom.

"Don't you want to come in and take a ride?" he asked.

"Is it safe?" asked Jennie Haddon, one of the trio.

"Of course it is, Jennie, or he wouldn't be out in it," said Miss
Nestor hastily.  "Come on, let's get in.  I'm just dying for a
motor-boat ride."

"What will we do with our boat?" asked Katie Carson.

"Oh, I can tow that," replied the youth.  "Get right in and I'll take
you all around the lake."

"Not too far," stipulated the girl who had figured in the runaway.  "We
must be back for lunch, which will be served in about an hour.  Our
church and Sunday-school are having a picnic."

"Maybe Mr. Swift will come and have some lunch with us," suggested Miss
Carson, blushing prettily.

"Nothing would give me greater pleasure," answered Tom, and then he
laughed at his formal reply, the girls joining in.

"We'd be glad to have you," added Miss Haddon.  "Oh!" she suddenly
screamed, "the boat's tipping over!"

"Oh, no," Tom hastened to assure her, coming, to the side to help her
in.  "It just tilts a bit, with the weight of so many on one side.  It
couldn't capsize if it tried."

In another moment the three were in the roomy cockpit and Tom had made
the empty rowboat fast to the stern.  He was about to start up when
from another boat, containing two little girls and two slightly larger
boys, came a plaintive cry:

"Oh, mister, give us a ride!"

"Sure!" agreed Tom pleasantly.  "Just fasten your boat to the other
rowboat and I'll tow you."

One of the boys did this, and then, with three pretty girls as his
companions in the ARROW and towing the two boats, Tom started off.

The girls were very much interested in the craft and asked all sorts of
questions about how the engine operated.  Tom explained as clearly as
he could how the gasoline exploded in the cylinders, about the electric
spark and about the propeller.  Then, when he had finished, Miss Haddon
remarked naively:

"Oh, Mr. Swift, you've explained it beautifully, and I'm sure if our
teacher in school made things as clear as you have that I could get
along fine.  I understand all about it, except I don't see what makes
the engine go."

"Oh," said Tom faintly, and he wondering what would be the best remark
to make under the circumstances, when Miss Nestor created a diversion
by looking at her watch and exclaiming:

"Oh, girls, it's lunch time!  We must go ashore.  Will you kindly put
about, Mr. Swift--I hope that is the proper term--and--land us--is that
right?" and she looked archly at Tom.

"That's perfectly right," he admitted with a laugh and a glance into
the girl's brown eyes.  "I'll put you ashore at once," and he headed
for a small dock.

"And come yourself to take lunch with us, added Miss Haddon.

"I'm afraid I might be in the way," stammered Tom.  "I--I have a pretty
good appetite, and--"

"I suppose you think that girls on a picnic don't take much lunch,"
finished Miss Nestor.  "But I assure you that we have plenty, and that
you will be very welcome," she added warmly.

"Yes, and I'd like to have him explain over again how the engine
works," went on Miss Haddon.  "I am so interested."

Tom helped the girls out, receiving their thanks as well as those of
the children in the second boat.  But as he walked with the young
ladies through the grove the young inventor registered a mental vow
that he would steer clear of explaining again how a gasoline engine
worked.

"Now come right over this way to our table," invited Miss Nestor.  "I
want you to meet papa and mamma."

Tom followed her.  As he stepped from behind a clump of trees he saw,
standing not far away, a figure that seemed strangely familiar.  A
moment later the figure turned and Tom saw Andy Foger confronting him.
At the sight of our hero the bully turned red and walked quickly away,
while Tom's fingers touched the ring of keys in his pocket.




CHAPTER VII

A BRUSH WITH ANDY


So unexpected was his encounter with Andy that the young inventor
hardly knew how to act, especially since he was a guest of the young
ladies.  Tom did not want to do or say anything to embarrass them or
make a scene, yet he did want to have a talk, and a very serious talk,
with Andy Foger.

Miss Nestor must have noticed Tom's sudden start at his glimpse of
Andy, for she asked: "Did you see some one you knew, Mr. Swift?"

"Yes," replied Tom, "I did--er--that is--" He paused in some confusion.

"Perhaps you'd like---that is prefer--to go with them instead of taking
lunch with girls who don't know anything about engines?" she persisted.

"Oh, no indeed," Tom hastened to assure her.  "He--that is--the person
I saw wouldn't care to have me lunch with him," and the youth smiled
grimly.

"Would you like to bring him over to our table?" inquired Miss Carson.
"We have plenty for him."

"No, I think that would hardly do," continued the lad, who tried not to
smile at the picture of the red-haired and squint-eyed Andy Foger
making one of a party with the girls.  The young ladies fortunately had
not noticed the bully, who was out of view by this time.

Tom was presented to Mr. and Mrs. Nestor, who told him how glad they
were to meet the young man who had been instrumental in saving their
daughter from injury, if not death.  Tom was a bit embarrassed, but
bore the praise as well as he could, and he was very glad when a
diversion, in the shape of lunch, occurred.

After a meal on tables under the trees in the grove Tom took the girls
and some of their friends out in his motor-boat again.  They covered
several miles around the lake before returning to the picnic ground.

As Tom was starting toward home in his boat, wondering what had become
of Andy and trying to think of a reason why the bully should attend
anything as "tame" as a church picnic, the object of his thoughts came
strolling through the trees down to the shore of the lake.  The moment
he saw Tom the red-haired lad started back, but the young inventor,
leaping out of his boat, called out:

"Hold on there, Andy Foger, I want to see you!" and there was menace in
Tom's tone.

"But, I don't want to see you!" retorted the other sulkily.  "I've got
no use for you."

"No more have I for you," was Tom's quick reply.  "But I want to return
you these keys.  You dropped them in my boat the other night when you
tried to set it afire.  If I ever catch you--"

"My keys!  Your boat!  On fire!" gasped Andy, so plainly astonished
that Tom knew his surprise was genuine.

"Yes, your keys.  You were a little too quick for me or I'd have
caught you at it.  The next time you pick a lock don't leave your keys
behind you," and he held out the jingling ring.

Andy Foger advanced slowly.  He took the bunch of keys and looked at
the tag.

"They are mine," he said slowly, as if there was some doubt about it.

"Of course they are," declared Tom.  "I found them where you dropped
them--in my boat."

"Do you mean over at the auction?"

"No, I mean down in my boathouse, where you sneaked in the other night
and tried to do some damage.

"The other night!" cried Andy.  "I never was near your boathouse any
night and I never lost my keys there!  I lost these the day of the
auction, on Mr. Hastings' ground, and I've been looking for them ever
since."

"Didn't you sneak in my boathouse the other night and try to do some
mischief?  Didn't you drop them then?"

"No, I didn't," retorted Andy earnestly.  "I lost those keys at the
auction, and I can prove it to you.  Look, I advertised for them in the
weekly Gazette."

The red-haired lad pulled a crumpled paper from his pocket and showed
Tom an advertisement offering a reward of two dollars for a bunch of
keys on a ring, supposed to have been lost at the auction on Mr.
Hastings' grounds in Lanton.  The finder was to return them to Andy
Foger.

"Does that look as if I lost the keys in your boathouse?" demanded the
bully sneeringly.  "I wouldn't have advertised them that way if I'd been
trying to keep my visit quiet.  Besides, I can prove that I was out of
town several nights.  I was over to an entertainment in Mansburg one
night and I didn't get home until two o'clock in the morning, because
my machine broke down.  Ask Ned Newton.  He saw me at the
entertainment."

Andy's manner was so earnest that Tom could not help believing him.
Then there was the evidence of the advertisement.  Clearly the
squint-eyed youth had not been the mysterious visitor to the boathouse
and had not unlocked the forward compartment.  But if it was not he,
who could it have been and how did the keys get there?  These were
questions which racked Tom's brain.

"You can ask Ned Newton," repeated Andy.  "He'll prove that I couldn't
have been near your place, if you don't believe me."

"Oh, I believe you all right," answered Tom, for there could be no
doubting Andy's manner, even though he and the young inventor were not
on good terms.  "But how did your keys get in my boat?"

"I don't know, unless you found them, kept them and dropped them
there," was the insolent answer.

"You know better than that," exclaimed Tom.

"Well, I owe you a reward of two dollars for giving them back to me,"
continued the bully patronizingly.  "Here it is," and he hauled out
some bills.

"I don't want your money!" fired back Tom.

"But I'd like to know who it was that was in my boat."

"And I'd like to know who it was took my keys," and Andy stuffed the
money back in his pocket.  Tom did not answer.  He was puzzling over a
queer matter and he wanted to be alone and think.  He turned aside from
the red-haired lad and walked toward his motor-boat.

"I'll give you a surprise in a few days," Andy called after him, but
Tom did not turn his head nor did he inquire what the surprise might be.

Mr. Swift was somewhat puzzled when his son related the outcome of the
key incident.  He agreed with Tom that some one might have found the
ring and kept it, and that the same person might have been the one whom
Tom had surprised in the boathouse.

"But it's idle to speculate on it," commented the inventor.  "Andy
might have induced some of his chums to act for him in harming your
boat, and the key advertisement might have been only a ruse."

"I hardly think so," answered his son, shaking his head.  "It strikes
me as being very curious, and I'm going to see if I can't get at the
bottom of it."

But a week or more passed and Tom had no clew.  In the meanwhile he was
working away at his motor-boat, installing several improvements.

One of these was a better pump, which circulated the water around the
cylinders, and another was a new system of lubrication under forced
feed.

"This ought to give me a little more speed," reasoned Tom, who was not
yet satisfied with his craft.  "Guess I'll take it out for a spin."

He was alone in the ARROW, taking a long course up the lake when, as he
passed a wooded point that concealed from view a sort of bay, he heard
the puffing of another motor-boat.

"Maybe that's Mr. Hastings," thought Tom.  "If I raced with him now, I
think the ARROW could give a better account of herself."

The young inventor looked at the boat as it came into view.  It needed
but a glance to show that it was not the CARLOPA.  Then, as it came
nearer, Tom saw a familiar figure in it--a red-haired, squint-eyed chap.

"Andy Foger!" exclaimed Tom.  "He's got a motor-boat!  This is the
surprise he spoke of."

The boat was rapidly approaching him, and he saw that it was painted a
vivid red.  Then he could make out the name on the bow, RED STREAK.
Andy was sending the craft toward him at a fast rate.

"You needn't think you're the only one on this lake who has a gasoline
boat!" called Andy boastfully.  "This is my new one and the fastest
thing afloat around here.  I can go all around you.  Do you want to
race?"

It was a "dare," and Tom never took such things when he could
reasonably enter a contest.  He swung his boat around so as to shoot
alongside of Andy and answered:

"Yes, I'll race you.  Where to?"

"Down opposite Kolb's dock and back to this point," was the answer.
"I'll give you a start, as my engine has three cylinders.  This is a
racing boat."

"I don't need any start," declared Tom.  "I'll race you on even terms.
Go ahead!"

Both lads adjusted their timers to get more speed.  The water began to
curl away from the sharp prows, the motors exploded faster and faster.
The race was on between the ARROW and the RED STREAK.




CHAPTER VIII

OFF ON A TRIP


Glancing with critical eyes at the craft of his rival, Tom saw that
Andy Foger had a very fine boat.  The young inventor also realized that
if he was to come anywhere near winning the race he would have to get
the utmost speed out of his engine, for the new boat the bully had was
designed primarily for racing, while Tom's was an all-around pleasure
craft, though capable of something in the speed line.

"I'll be giving you a tow in a few minutes, as soon as my engine gets
warmed up!" sneered Andy.

"Maybe," said Tom, and then he crouched down to make as little
resistance as possible to the wind.  Andy, on the contrary, sat boldly
upright at the auto steering wheel of his boat.

On rushed the two motor craft, their prows exactly even and the
propellers tossing up a bulge in the water at their sterns.  Rapidly
acquiring speed after the two lads had adjusted the timers on their
motors, the boats were racing side by side, seemingly on even terms.

The RED STREAK had a very sharp prow, designed to cut through the
water. It was of the type known as an automobile launch.  That is, the
engine was located forward, under a sort of hood, which had two hinged
covers like a bat's wings. The steering-wheel shaft went through the
forward bulkhead, slantingly, like the wheel of an auto, and was
arranged with gasoline and sparking levers on the center post in a
similar manner. At the right of the wheel was a reversing lever, by
which the propeller blades could be set at neutral, or arranged so as
to drive the boat backward. Altogether the RED STREAK was a very fine
boat and had cost considerably more than had Tom's, even when the
latter was new. All these things the young owner of the ARROW thought
of as he steered his craft over the course.

"I hardly think I can win," Tom remarked to himself in a whisper.  "His
boat is too speedy for this one.  I have a chance, though, for his
engine is new, and I don't believe he understands it as well as I do
mine.  Then, too, I am sure I have a better ignition system."

But if Tom had any immediate hopes of defeating Andy, they were doomed
to disappointment, for about two minutes after the race started the RED
STREAK forged slowly ahead.

"Come on!" cried the red-haired lad.  "I thought you wanted a race."

"I do," answered the young inventor.  "We're a long way from the dock
yet, and we've got to come back."

"You'll be out of it by the time I get to the dock," declared Andy.

Indeed it began to look so, for the auto boat was now a full length
ahead of Tom's craft and there was open water between them.  But our
hero knew a thing or two about racing, though he had not long been a
motor-boat owner.  He adjusted the automatic oiler on the cylinders to
give more lubrication, as he intended to get more speed out of his
engine.  Then he opened the gasoline cock a trifle more and set his
timer forward a few notches to get an earlier spark.  He was not going
to use the maximum speed just yet, but he first wanted to see how the
motor of the ARROW would behave under these conditions.  To his delight
he saw his boat slowly creeping up on Andy's.  The latter, with a
glance over his shoulder, saw it too, and he advanced his spark.  His
craft forged ahead, but the rate of increase was not equal to Tom's.
"If I can keep up to him I suppose I ought to be glad," thought the
young inventor, "for his boat is away ahead of mine in rating."

Through the water the sharp bows cut.  There were only a few witnesses
to the race, but those who were out in boats saw a pretty sight as the
two speedy craft came on toward the dock, which was the turning point.

Andy's boat reached it first, and swung about in a wide circle for the
return.  Tom decided it was time to make his boat do its best, so he
set the timer at the limit, and the spark, coming more quickly,
increased the explosions.

Up shot the ARROW and, straightening out after the turn, Tom's craft
crept along until it lapped the stern of the RED STREAK.  Andy looked
back in dismay.  Then he tried to get more speed out of his engine.  He
did cause the screw to revolve a little faster, and Tom noted that he
was again being left behind.  Then one of those things, which may
happen at any time to a gasoline motor, happened to Andy's.  It began
to miss explosions.  At first it was only occasionally, then the misses
became more frequent.

The owner of the RED STREAK with one hand on the steering wheel, tried
with the other to adjust the motor to get rid of the trouble, but he
only made it worse.  Andy's boat began to fall back and Tom's to creep
up.  Frantically Andy worked the gasoline and sparking levers, but
without avail.  At last one cylinder went completely out of service.

The two boats were now on even terms and were racing along side by side
toward the wooded, point, which marked the finish.

"I'll beat you yet!" exclaimed Andy fiercely.

"Better hurry up!" retorted Tom.

But the young inventor was not to have it all his own way.  With a
freakishness equal to that with which it had ceased to explode the dead
cylinder came to life again, and the RED STREAK shot ahead.  Once more
Andy's boat had the lead of a length and the finish of the race was
close at hand.  The squint-eyed lad turned and shouted: "I told you I'd
beat you!  Want a tow now?"

It began to look as though Tom would need it, but he still had
something in reserve.  One of the improvements he had put in the ARROW
was a new auxiliary ignition system.  This he now decided to use.

With a quick motion Tom threw over the switch that put it into
operation.  A hotter, "fatter" spark was at once produced, and
adjusting his gasoline cock so that a little more of the fluid would be
drawn in, making a "richer" mixture, the owner of the ARROW saw the
craft shoot forward as if, like some weary runner, new life had been
infused.

In vain did Andy frantically try to get more speed out of his motor.
He cut out the muffler, and the explosions sounded loudly over the
lake.  But it was no use.  A minute later the ARROW, which had slowly
forged ahead, crossed the bows of the RED STREAK opposite the finishing
point, and Tom had won the race.

"Well, was that fair?" our hero called to Andy, who had quickly shut
off some of his power as he saw his rival's daring trick.  "Did I beat
you fair?"

"You wouldn't have beaten me if my engine hadn't gone back on me,"
grumbled Andy, chagrin showing on his face.  "Wait until my motor runs
smoother and I'll give you a big handicap and beat you.  My boat's
faster than yours.  It ought to be.  It cost fifteen hundred dollars
and it's a racer."

"I guess it doesn't like racing," commented Tom as he swung the prow of
his craft down the lake toward his home.  But he knew there was some
truth in what Andy had said.  The RED STREAK was a more speedy boat,
and, with proper handling, could have beaten the ARROW.  That was where
Tom's superior knowledge came in useful.  "Just you wait, I'll beat you
yet," called Andy, after the young inventor, but the latter made no
answer.  He was satisfied.

Mr. Swift was much interested that night in his son's account of the
race.

"I had no idea yours was such a speedy boat," he said.

"Well, it wasn't originally," admitted Tom, "but the improvements I put
on it made it so.  But, dad, when are we going on our tour?  You look
more worn out than I've seen you in some time, not excepting when the
turbine model was stolen.  Are you worrying over your gyroscope
invention?"

"Somewhat, Tom.  I can't seem to hit on just what I want.  It's a
difficult problem."

"Then I tell you what let's do, dad.  Let's drop everything in the
inventive line and go off on a vacation.  I'll take you up the lake in
my boat and you can spend a week at the Lakeview Hotel at Sandport.  It
will do you good."

"What will you do, Tom?"

"Oh, Ned Newton and I will cruise about and we'll take you along any
time you want to go.  We're going to camp out nights or sleep in the
boat if it rains.  I've ordered a canopy with side curtains.  Ned and I
don't care for the hotel life in the summer.  Will you go?"

Mr. Swift considered a moment.  He did need a rest, for he had been
working hard and his brain was weary with thinking of many problems.
His son's program sounded very attractive.

"I think I will accept," said the inventor with a smile.  "When can you
start, Tom?"

"In about four days.  Ned Newton will get his vacation then and I'll
have the canopy on.  I'll start to work at it to-morrow.  Then we'll go
on a trip."

Sandport was a summer resort at the extreme southern end of Lake
Carlopa, and Mr. Swift at once wrote to the Lakeview Hotel there to
engage a room for himself.  In the meanwhile Tom began to put the
canopy on his boat and arrange for the trip, which would take nearly a
whole day.  Ned Newton was delighted with the prospect of a camping
tour and helped Tom to get ready.  They took a small tent and plenty of
supplies, with some food.  They did not need to carry many rations, as
the shores of the lake were lined with towns and villages where food
could be procured.

Finally all was ready for the trip and the night before the start Ned
Newton stayed at Tom's house so as to be in readiness for going off
early in the morning.  The day was all that could be desired, Tom
noted, as he and his chum hurried down to the dock before breakfast to
put their blankets in the boat.  As the young inventor entered the
craft he uttered an exclamation.

"What's the matter?" asked Ned.

"I was sure I locked the sliding door of that forward compartment," was
the reply.  "Now it's open."  He looked inside the space occupied by
the gasoline tank and cried out:  "One of the braces is gone!  There's
been some one at my boat in the night and they tried to damage her."

"Much harm done?" asked Ned anxiously.

"No, none at all, to speak of," replied Tom.  "I can easily put a new
block under the tank.  In fact, I don't really need all I have.  But
why should any one take one out, and who did it?  That's what I want to
know."

The two lads looked carefully about the dock and boat for a sign of the
missing block or any clews that might show who had been tampering with
the ARROW, but they could find nothing.

"Maybe the block fell out," suggested Ned.

"It couldn't," replied Tom.  "It was one of the new ones I put in
myself and it was nailed fast.  You can see where it's been pried
loose.  I can't understand it," and Tom thought rapidly of several
mysterious occurrences of late in which the strange man at the auction
and the person he had surprised one night in the boathouse had a part.

"Well, it needn't delay our trip," resumed the young inventor.  "Maybe
there's a hoodoo around here, and it will do us good to get away a few
days.  Come on, we'll have breakfast, get dad and start."

A little later the ARROW was puffing away up the lake in the direction
of Sandport.




CHAPTER IX

MR. SWIFT IS ALARMED


"Don't you feel better already, dad?" asked Tom that noon as they
stopped under a leaning, overhanging tree for lunch on the shore of the
lake.  "I'll leave it to Ned if you don't look more contented and less
worried."

"I believe he does," agreed the other lad.  "Well, I must say I
certainly have enjoyed the outing so far," admitted the inventor with a
smile.  "And I haven't been bothering about my gyroscope.  I think I'll
take another sandwich, Tom, and a few more olives."

"That's the way to talk!" cried the son.  "Your appetite is improving,
too.  If Mrs. Baggert could see you she'd say so."

"Oh, yes, Mrs. Baggert.  I do hope she and Garret will look after the
house and shops well," said Mr. Swift, and the old, worried look came
like a shadow over his face.

"Now don't be thinking of that, dad," advised Tom, "Of course
everything will be all right.  Do you think some of those model thieves
will return and try to get some of your other inventions?"

"I don't know, Tom.  Those men were unscrupulous scoundrels, and you
can never tell what they might do to revenge themselves on us for
defeating their plans."

"Well, I guess Garret and Mrs. Baggert will look out for them,"
remarked his son.  "Don't worry."

"Yes, it's bad for the digestion," added Ned.  "If you don't mind, Tom,
I'll have some more coffee and another sandwich myself."

"Nothing the matter with your appetite, either," commented the young
inventor as he passed the coffee pot and the plate.

They were soon on their way again, the ARROW making good time up the
lake.  Tom was at the engine, making several minor adjustments to it,
while Ned steered.  Mr. Swift reclined on one of the cushioned seats
under the shade of the canopy.  The young owner of the ARROW looked
over the stretch of water from time to time for a possible sight of
Andy Foger, but the RED STREAK was not to be seen.  The Lakeview Hotel
was reached late that afternoon and the boat was tied up to the dock,
while Tom and Ned accompanied Mr. Swift to see him comfortably
established in his room.

"Won't you stay to supper with me?" invited the inventor to his son and
the latter's chum.  "Or do you want to start right in on camp life?"

"I guess we'll stay to supper and remain at the hotel to-night,"
decided Tom.  "We got here a little later than I expected, and Ned and
I hardly have time to go very far and establish a temporary camp.
We'll live a life of luxurious ease to-night and begin to be
'wanderlusters' and get back to nature to-morrow."

In the morning Tom and his chum, full of enthusiasm for the pleasures
before them, started off, promising to come back to the hotel in a few
days to see how Mr. Swift felt.  The trip had already done the man good
and his face wore a brighter look.

Tom and Ned, in the speedy ARROW, cruised along the lakeshores all that
morning.  At noon they went ashore, made a temporary camp and arranged
to spend the night there in the tent.  After this was erected they got
out their fishing tackle and passed the afternoon at that sport, having
such good luck that they provided their own supper without having to
depend on canned stuff.

They lived this life for three days, making a new camp each night,
being favored with good weather, so that they did not have to sleep in
the boat to keep dry.  On the afternoon of the third day Tom, with a
critical glance at the sky, remarked:

"I shouldn't be surprised if it rained to-morrow, Ned."

"Me either.  It does look sort of hazy, and the wind is in a bad
quarter."

"Then what do you say to heading for the hotel? I fancy dad will be glad
to see us."

"That suits me. We can start camp life again after the storm passes."

They started for Sandport that afternoon.  When within about two miles
of the hotel dock Tom saw, just ahead of them, a small motor-boat.  Ned
observed it too and called out:

"S'pose that's Andy looking for another race?"

"No, the boat's too small for his.  We'll put over that way and see who
it is."

The other craft did not appear to be moving very rapidly and the ARROW
was soon overhauling it.  As the two chums came nearer they could hear
the puffing of the motor.  Tom listened with critical ears.

"That machine isn't working right," he remarked to his chum.

At that moment there sounded a loud explosion from the other boat and
at the same time there came over the water a shrill cry of alarm.
"That's a girl in that boat!" exclaimed Ned.  "Maybe she's hurt."

"No, the motor only backfired," observed Tom.  "But we'll go over and
see if we can help her.  Perhaps she doesn't understand it.  Girls
don't know much about machinery."

A little later the ARROW shot up alongside the other craft, which had
come to a stop.  The two lads could see a girl bending over the motor,
twirling the flywheel and trying to get it started.  "Can I help you?"
asked Tom, shutting off the power from his craft.

The young lady glanced up.  Her face was red and she seemed ill at
ease.  At the sight of the young inventor she uttered an exclamation of
relief.

"Why, Mr. Swift!" she cried.  "Oh, I'm in such trouble.  I can't make
the machine work, and I'm afraid it's broken; it exploded."

"Miss Nestor!" blurted out Tom, more surprised evidently to see his
acquaintance of the runaway again than she was at beholding him.  "I
didn't know you ran a motor-boat," he added.  "I don't," said she
simply and helplessly.  "That's the trouble, it won't run."

"How comes it that you are up here?" went on Tom.

"I am stopping with friends, who have a cottage near the Lakeview
Hotel.  They have a motor-boat and I got Dick Blythe--he's the owner of
this--to show me how to run it.  I thought I knew, and I started out a
little while ago.  At first it went beautifully, but a few minutes ago
it blew up, or--or something dreadful happened."

"Nothing very dreadful, I guess," Tom assured her.  "I think I can fix
it."  He got into the other boat and soon saw what the trouble was.
The carburetor had gotten out of adjustment and the gasoline was not
feeding properly.  The young inventor soon had it in order, and,
testing the motor, found that it worked perfectly.

"Oh, I can't thank you enough," cried Miss Nestor with a flash from her
brown eyes that made Tom's heart beat double time.  "I was afraid I had
damaged the boat, and I knew Dick, who is a sort of second cousin of
mine, would never forgive me."

"There's no harm done," Tom assured her.  "But you had better keep near
us on your way back, that is, if you are going back."

"Oh, indeed I am.  I was frightened when I found I'd come so far away
from shore, and then, when that explosion took place--well, you can
imagine how I felt.  Indeed I will keep near you.  Are you stopping
near here?  If you are, I wish you'd come and see me, you and Mr.
Newton," she added, for Tom had introduced his chum.

"I'll be very glad to," answered our hero, and he told how he happened
to be in the neighborhood.  "I'll give you a few lessons in managing a
boat, if you like," he added.

"Oh, will you?  That will be lovely!  I won't tell Dick about it, and
I'll surprise him some day by showing him how well I can run his boat."

"Good idea," commented Tom.

He started the motor for Miss Nestor, having stopped it after his first
test, and then, with the DOT, which was the name of the small boat Miss
Nestor was in, following the larger ARROW, the run back to the hotel
was made.  The young lady turned off near the Lakeview dock to go to
the cottage where she was stopping and the lads tied up at the hotel
boathouse.

"Yes, we are in for a storm," remarked Tom as he and his chum walked up
toward the hotel.  "I wonder how dad is?  I hope the outing is doing
him good."

"There he comes now," observed Ned, and, looking up, Tom saw his father
approaching.  The young inventor was at once struck by the expression
on his parent's face.  Mr. Swift looked worried and Tom anxiously
hastened forward to meet him.

"What's the matter dad?" he asked as cheerfully as he could.  "Have you
been figuring over that gyroscope problem again, against my express
orders?" and he laughed a little.

"No, Tom, it's not the gyroscope that's worrying me."

"What is it then?"

"Those scoundrels are around again, Tom!" and Mr. Swift looked
apprehensively about him.

"You mean the men who stole the turbine model?"

"Yes.  I was walking in the woods near the hotel yesterday and I saw
Anson Morse.  He did not see me, for I turned aside as quickly as I had
a glimpse of him.  He was talking to another man."

"What sort of a man?"

"Well, an ordinary enough individual, but I noticed that he had
tattooed on the little finger of his left hand a blue ring."

"Happy Harry, the tramp!" exclaimed Tom.  "What can he and Morse be
doing here?"

"I don't know, Tom, but I'm worried.  I wish I was back home.  I'm
afraid something may happen to some of my inventions.  I want to go
back to Shopton, Tom."

"Nonsense, dad.  Don't worry just because you saw some of your former
enemies.  Everything is all right at home.  Mrs. Baggert and Garret
Jackson will look after things.  But, if you like, I, can find out for
you how matters are."

"How, Tom?"

"By taking a run down there in my motor-boat.  I can do it to-morrow
and get back by night, if I start early.  Then you will not worry."

"All right, Tom; I wish you would.  Come up to my room and we will talk
it over.  I'd rather leave you go than telephone, as I don't like to
talk of my business over the wire if I can avoid it."




CHAPTER X

A CRY FOR HELP


"Now, dad, tell me all about it," requested Tom when he and Ned were in
Mr. Swift's apartment at the hotel, safe from the rain that was
falling.  "How did you happen to see Anson Morse and Happy Harry?" My
old readers will doubtless remember that the latter was the disguised
tramp who was so vindictive toward Tom, while Morse was the man who
endeavored to sneak in Mr. Swift's shop and steal a valuable invention.

"Well, Tom," proceeded the inventor, "there isn't much to tell.  I was
out walking in the woods yesterday, and when I was behind a clump of
bushes I heard voices.  I looked out and there I saw the two men."

"At first I thought they were trailing me, but I saw that they had not
seen me, and I didn't see how they could know I was in the
neighborhood.  So I quietly made my way back to the hotel."

"Could you hear what they were saying?"

"Not all, but they seemed angry over something.  The man with the blue
ring on his finger asked the other man whether Murdock had been heard
from."

"Who is Murdock?"

"I don't know, unless he is another member of the gang or unless that
is an assumed name."

"It may be that.  What else did you hear?"

"The man we know as Morse replied that he hadn't heard from him, but
that he suspected Murdock was playing a double game.  Then the
tramp--Happy Harry--asked this question: 'Have you any clew to the
sparkler?' And Morse answered: 'No, but I think Murdock has hid it
somewhere and is trying to get away with it without giving us our
share.' Then the two men walked away, and I came back to the hotel,"
finished Mr. Swift.

"Sparkler," murmured Tom.  "I wonder what that can be?"

"That's a slang word for diamonds," suggested Ned.

"So it is.  In that case, dad, I think we have nothing to worry about.
Those fellows must be going to commit a diamond robbery or perhaps it
has already taken place."

The inventor seemed relieved at this theory of his son.  His face
brightened and he said: "If they are going to commit a robbery, Tom, we
ought to notify the police."

"But if they said that 'Murdock,' whoever he is, had the sparkler and
was trying to get away with it without giving them their share,
wouldn't that indicate that the robbery had already taken place?" asked
Ned.

"That's so," agreed Tom.  "But it won't do any harm to tell the hotel
detective that suspicious characters are around, no matter if the robbery
has been committed.  Then he can be on the lookout.  But I don't think we
have anything to worry about, dad.  Still, if you like, I'll take a run
down to the house to see that everything is all right, though I'm sure
it will be found that we have nothing to be alarmed over."

"Well, I will be more relieved if you do," said the inventor, "However,
suppose we have a good supper now and you boys can stay at the hotel
to-night.  Then you and Ned can start off early in the morning."

"All right," agreed Tom, but there was a thoughtful look on his face
and he appeared to be planning something that needed careful attention
to details.

After supper that night Tom took his chum to one side and asked: "Would
you mind very much if you didn't make the trip to Shopton with me?"

"No, Tom, of course not, if it will help you any.  Do you want me to
stay here?"

"I think it will be a good plan.  I don't like to leave dad alone if
those scoundrels are around.  Of course he's able to look after
himself, but sometimes he gets absent minded from thinking too much
about his inventions."

"Of course I'll stay here at the hotel.  This is just as good a
vacation as I could wish."

"Oh, I don't mean all the while.  Just a day or so--until I come back.
I may be here again by to-morrow night and find that my father is
needlessly alarmed.  Then something may have happened at home and I
would be delayed.  If I should be, I'd feel better to know that you
were here."

"Then I'll stay, and if I see any of those men--"

"You'd better steer clear of them," advised Tom quickly.  "They are
dangerous customers."

"All right.  Then I'll go over and give Miss Nestor lessons on how to
run a motor-boat," was the smiling response.  "I fancy, with what she
and I know, we can make out pretty well."

"Hold on there!" cried Tom gaily.  "No trespassing, you know."

"Oh, I'll just say I'm your agent," promised Ned with a grin.  "You
can't object to that."

"No, I s'pose not.  Well, do the best you can.  She is certainly a nice
girl."

"Yes, but you do seem to turn up at most opportune times.  Luck is
certainly with you where she is concerned.  First you save her in a
runaway--"

"After I start the runaway," interrupted Tom.

"Then you take her for a ride in your motor-boat, and, lastly, you come
to her relief when she is stalled in the middle of the lake.  Oh you
certainly are a lucky dog!"

"Never mind, I'm giving you a show.  Now let's get to bed early, as I
want to get a good start."

Tom awoke to find a nasty, drizzling rainstorm in progress, and the
lake was almost hidden from view by a swirling fog.  Still he was not
to be daunted from his trip to Shopton by the weather, and, after a
substantial breakfast, he bade his father and Ned good-by and started
off in the ARROW.

The canopy he had provided was an efficient protection against the
rain, a celluloid window in the forward hanging curtains affording him
a view so that he could steer.

Through the mist puffed the boat, the motor being throttled down to
medium speed, for Tom was not as familiar with the lake as he would
like to have been, and he did not want to run aground or into another
craft.

He was thinking over what his father had told him about the presence of
the men and vainly wondering what might be their reference to the
"sparkler."  His thoughts also dwelt on the curious removal of the
bracing block from under the gasoline tank of his boat.

"I shouldn't be surprised but what Andy Foger did that," he mused.
"Some day he and I will have a grand fight, and then maybe he'll let me
alone.  Well, I've got other things to think about now.  The hotel
detective can keep a lookout for the men around the hotel, after the
warning I gave him, and I'll see that all is right at home."

The fog lifted somewhat and Tom put on more speed.  As he was steering
the boat along near shore he heard, off to the woods at his right, the
report of a gun.  It came so suddenly that he jumped involuntarily.  A
moment later there sounded, plainly through the damp air, a cry for
help.

"Some one's hurt--shot!" cried the youth aloud.

He turned the boat in toward the bank.  As he shut off the power from
the motor he heard the cry again:

"Help! Help!  Help!"

"I must go ashore!" he exclaimed.  "Probably some one is badly wounded
by a gun."

He paused for a moment as the fear came to him that it might be some of
the patent thieves.  Then, dismissing that idea as the ARROW's prow
touched the gravel, Tom sprang out, drew the boat up a little way,
fastened the rope to a tree and hurried off into the dripping woods in
the direction of the voice that was calling for aid.




CHAPTER XI

A QUICK RUN


"Where are you?"  cried Tom.  "Are you hurt?  Where are you?"

Uttering these words after he had hurried into the woods a short
distance, the young inventor paused for an answer.  At first he could
hear nothing but the drip of water from the branches of the trees;
then, as he listened intently, he became aware of a groan not far away.

"Where are you?"  cried the lad again.  "I've come to help you.  Where
are you?"

He had lost what little fear he had had at first, that it might be one
of the unscrupulous gang, and came to the conclusion that he might
safely offer to help.

Once more the groan sounded and it was followed by a faint voice
speaking:

"Here I am, under the big oak tree.  Oh, whoever you are, help me
quickly!  I'm bleeding to death!"

With the sound of the voice to guide him, Tom swung around.  The appeal
had come from the left and, looking in that direction, he saw, through
the mist, a large oak tree.  Leaping over the underbrush toward it he
caught sight of the wounded man at its foot.  Beside him lay a gun and
there was a wound in the man's right arm.

"Who shot you?"  cried Tom, hurrying to the side of the man.  "Was it
some of those patent thieves?"  Then, realizing that a stranger would
know nothing of the men who had stolen the model, Tom prepared to
change the form of his question.  But, before he had an opportunity to
do this, the man, whose eyes were closed, opened them, and, as he got a
better sight of his face, Tom uttered a cry.

"Why, it's Mr. Duncan!"  exclaimed the lad.  He had recognized the rich
hunter, whom he had first met in the woods that spring shortly after
Happy Harry, the tramp, had disabled Tom's motor-cycle.  "Mr. Duncan,"
the young inventor repeated, "how did you get shot?"

"Is that you, Tom Swift?"  asked the gunner.  "Help me, please.  I must
stop this bleeding in my arm.  I'll tell you about it afterward.  Wind
something around it tight--your handkerchief will do."

The man sighed weakly and his eyes closed again.  The lad saw the blood
spurting from an ugly wound.

"I must make a tourniquet," the youth exclaimed.  "That will check the
bleeding until I can get him to a doctor."

With Tom to think was to act.  He took out his knife and cut off Mr.
Duncan's sleeves below the injury, slashing through coat and shirts.
Then he saw that part of a charge of shot had torn away some of the
large muscular development of the upper arm.  The hunter seemed to have
fainted and the youth worked quickly.  Tying his handkerchief above the
wound and inserting a small stone under the cloth, so that the pebble
would press on the main artery, Tom put a stick in the handkerchief and
began to twist it.  This had the effect of tightening the linen around
the arm, and in a few seconds the lad was glad to see that the blood
had stopped spurting out with every beat of the heart.  Giving the
tourniquet a few more twists to completely stop the flow of blood, Tom
fastened the stick-lever in place by a bit of string.

"That's--that's better," murmured Mr. Duncan.  "Now if you can go for a
doctor--"  He had to pause for breath.

"I'll not leave you here alone while I go for a doctor," declared Tom.
"I have my motor-boat on the lake.  Do you think I could get you down
to it and take you home?"

"Perhaps--maybe.  I'll be stronger in a moment, now that the bleeding
has stopped.  But not--not home--frighten my wife.  Take me to the
sanitarium if you can--sanitarium up the lake, a few miles from here."

The unfortunate man, who had tried to sit upright, had to lean back
against the tree again.  Tom understood what he meant in spite of the
broken sentences.  Mr. Duncan did not want to be taken home in the
condition he was then in, for fear of alarming his wife.  He wanted to
be taken to the sanitarium, and Tom knew where this was, a well-known
resort for the treatment of various diseases and surgical cases.  It
was about five miles away and on the opposite shore of the lake.

"Water--a drink!"  murmured Mr. Duncan.

Seeing that his patient would be all right, for a few minutes at least,
Tom hurried to his motor-boat, got a cup and, filling it with water
from a jug he carried, he hastened with it to the hunter.  The fluid
revived the man wonderfully and now that the bleeding had almost
completely stopped, Mr. Duncan was much stronger.

"Do you think you can get to the boat, if I help you?"  asked Tom.

"Yes, I believe so.  To think of meeting you again, and under such
circumstances!  It is providential."

"Did someone shoot you?"  inquired Tom, who could not get out of his
head the notion of the men who had once assaulted him.

"No, I shot myself," answered Mr. Duncan as he got to his feet with
Tom's help.  "I was out with my gun, practicing just as I was that day
when I met you in the woods.  I stooped down to crawl under a bush and
the weapon went off, the muzzle being close against my arm.  I can't
understand how it happened.  I fell down and called for help.  Then I
guess I must have fainted, but I came to when I heard you talking to
me.  I shouldn't have come out to-day as it is so wet, but I had some
new shot shells I wished to try in order to test them before the
hunting season.  But if I can get to the sanitarium, I will be well
taken care of.  I know one of the doctors there."

With Tom leading him and acting as a sort of support, the journey to
the motor-boat was slowly made.  Making as comfortable a bed as
possible out of the seat cushions, Tom assisted Mr. Duncan to it, and
then starting the engine he sent his boat out from shore at half speed,
as the fog was still thick and he did not want to run upon a rock.

"Do you know where the sanitarium is?"  asked the wounded hunter.

"About," answered Tom a little doubtfully, "but I'm afraid it's going
to be hard to locate it in this fog."

"There's a compass in my coat pocket," said Mr. Duncan.  "Take it out
and I'll tell you how to steer.  You ought to carry a compass if you're
going to be a sailor."

Tom was beginning to think so himself and wondered that he had not
thought of it before.  He found the one the hunter had, and placing it
on the seat near him, he carefully listened to the wounded man's
directions.  Tom easily comprehended and soon had the boat headed in
the proper direction.  After that it was comparatively easy to keep on
the right course, even in the fog.

But there was another danger, however, and this was that he might run
into another boat.  True, there were not many on Lake Carlopa, but
there were some, and one of the few motor-boats might be out in spite
of the bad weather.

"Guess I'll not run at full speed," decided Tom.  "I wouldn't like to
crash into the RED STREAK.  We'd both sink."

So he did not run his motor at the limit and sat at the steering-wheel,
peering ahead into the fog for the first sight of another craft.

He turned to look at Mr. Duncan and was alarmed at the pallor of his
face.  The man's eyes were closed and he was breathing in a peculiar
manner.

"Mr. Duncan," cried Tom, "are you worse?"

There was no answer.  Leaving the helm for a moment, Tom bent over the
injured hunter.  A glance showed him what had happened.  The tourniquet
had slipped and the wound was bleeding again.  Tom quickly shut off the
motor, so that he might give his whole attention to the work of
tightening the handkerchief.  But something seemed to be wrong.  No
matter how tightly he twisted the stick the blood did not stop flowing.
The lad was frightened.  In a short time the man would bleed to death.

"I've got to get him to the sanitarium in record time!"  exclaimed Tom.
"Fog or no fog, I've got to run at full speed!  I've got to chance it!"

Making the bandage as tight as he could and fastening it in place, the
young inventor sprang to the motor and set it in motion.  Then he went
to the wheel.  In a few minutes the ARROW was speeding through the
water as it had never done before, except when it had raced the RED
STREAK.  "If I hit anything--good-by!"  thought Tom grimly.  His hands
were tense on the rim of the steering-wheel and he was ready in an
instant to reverse the motor as he sat there straining his eyes to see
through the curtain of mist that hung over the lake.  Now and then he
glanced at the compass, to keep on the right course, and from time to
time he looked at Mr. Duncan.  The hunter was still unconscious.

How Tom accomplished that trip he hardly remembered afterward.  Through
the fog he shot, expecting any moment to crash into some other boat.
He did pass a rowing craft in which sat a lone fisherman.  The lad was
upon him in an instant, but a turn of the wheel sent the ARROW safely
past, and the startled fisherman, whose frail craft was set to rocking
violently by the swell from the motor-boat, sent an objecting cry
through the fog after Tom.  But the youth did not reply.  On and on he
raced, getting the last atom of power from his motor.

He feared Mr. Duncan would be dead when he arrived, but when he saw the
dock of the sanitarium looming up out of the mist and shut off the
power to slowly run up to it, he placed his hand on the wounded man's
heart and found it still beating.

"He's alive, anyhow," thought the youth, and then his craft bumped up
against the bulkhead and a man in the boathouse on the dock was sent on
the run for a physician.

Mr. Duncan was quickly taken up to the sanitarium on a stretcher and
Tom followed.

"You must have made a record run," observed one of the physicians a
little while afterward, when Tom was telling of his trip while waiting
in the office to hear the report on the hunter's condition.

"I guess I did," muttered the young inventor "only I didn't think so at
the time.  It seemed as if we were only crawling along."




CHAPTER XII

SUSPICIOUS CHARACTERS


Under the skill of the physicians at the lake sanitarium Mr. Duncan's
wound was quickly attended to and the bleeding, which Tom had partly
checked, was completely stopped.  Some medicines having been
administered, the hunter regained a little of his strength, and, about
an hour after he had been brought to the resort, he was able to see
Tom, who, at his request, was admitted to his room.  The young inventor
found Mr. Duncan propped up in bed, with his injured arm bandaged.

"Is the injury a bad one?"  asked Tom, entering softly.

"Not as bad as I feared," replied the hunter, while a trained nurse
placed a chair for the lad at the bedside.  "If it had not been for
you, though, I'm afraid to think of what might have happened."

"I am glad I chanced to be going past when you called," replied the lad.

"Well, you can imagine how thankful I am," resumed Mr. Duncan.  "I'll
thank you more properly at another time.  I hope I didn't delay you on
your trip."

"It's not of much consequence," responded the youth.  "I was only going
to see that everything was all right at our house," and he explained
about his father being at the hotel and mentioned his worriment.  "I
will go on now unless I can do something more for you," resumed Tom.
"I will probably stay at our house all night to-night instead of trying
to get back to Sandport."

"I'd like to send word to my wife about what has happened," said the
hunter.  "If it would not be too much out of your way, I'd appreciate
it if you could stop at my home in Waterford and tell her, so she will
not be alarmed at my absence."

"I'll do it," replied our hero.  "There is no special need of my
hurrying.  I have brought your gun and compass up from the boat.  They
are down in the office."

"Will you do me a favor?"  asked Mr. Duncan quickly.

"Of course."

"Then please accept that gun and compass with my compliments.  They are
both of excellent make, and I don't think I shall use that gun this
season.  My wife would be superstitious about it.  As for the compass,
you'll need one in this fog, and I can recommend mine as being
accurate."

"Oh, I couldn't think of taking them," expostulated Tom, but his eyes
sparkled in anticipation, for he had been wishing for a gun such as Mr.
Duncan owned.  He also needed a compass.

"If you don't take them I shall feel very much offended," the hunter
said, "and the nurse here will tell you that sick persons ought to be
humored.  Hadn't they?"  and he appealed to the pretty young woman, who
was smiling at Tom.

"That's perfectly true," she said, showing her white, even teeth.  "I
think, Mr. Swift, I shall have to order you to take them."

"All right," agreed Tom, "only it's too much for what I did."

"It isn't half enough," remarked Mr. Duncan solemnly.  "Just explain
matters to my wife, if you will, and tell her the doctor says I can be
out in about a week.  But I'm not going hunting or practicing shots
again."

A little later Tom, with the compass before him to guide him on his
course through the fog, was speeding his boat toward Waterford.  Now
and then he glanced at the fine shotgun which he had so unexpectedly
acquired.

"This will come in handy this fall!"  he exclaimed.  "I'll go hunting
quail and partridge as well as wild ducks.  This compass is just what I
need, too."

Mrs. Duncan was at first very much alarmed when Tom started to tell her
of the accident, but she soon calmed down as the lad went more into
details and stated how comparatively out of danger her husband now was.
The hunter's wife insisted that Tom remain to dinner, and as he had
made up his mind he would have to devote two days instead of one to the
trip to his house, he consented.

The fog lifted that afternoon, and Tom, rejoicing in the sunlight,
which drove away the storm clouds, speeded up the ARROW until she was
skimming over the lake like a shaft from a bow.

"This is something like," he exclaimed.  "I'll soon be at home, find
everything all right and telephone to dad.  Then I'll sleep in my own
room and start back in the morning."

When Tom was within a few miles of his own boathouse he heard behind
him the "put-put"  of a motor craft.  Turning, he saw the RED STREAK
fairly flying along at some distance from him.

"Andy certainly is getting the speed out of her now," he remarked.
"He'd beat me if we were racing, but the trouble with his boat and
engine is that he can't always depend on it.  I guess he doesn't
understand how to run it.  I wonder if he'll offer to race now?"

But the red-haired owner of the auto boat evidently did not intend to
offer Tom a race.  The RED STREAK went on down the lake, passing the
ARROW about half a mile away.  Then the young inventor saw that Andy
had two other lads in the boat with him.

"Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey, I guess," he murmured.  "Well, they're
a trio pretty much alike.  The farther off they are the better I like
it."

Tom once more gave his attention to his own boat.  He was going at a
fair speed, but not the limit, and he counted on reaching home in about
a half hour.  Suddenly, when he was just congratulating himself on the
smooth-running qualities of his motor, which had not missed an
explosion, the machinery stopped.

"Hello!"  exclaimed the young inventor in some alarm.  "What's up now?"

He quickly shut off the gasoline and went back to the motor.  Now there
are so many things that may happen to a gasoline engine that it would
be difficult to name them all offhand, and Tom, who had not had very
much experience, was at a loss to find what had stopped his machinery.
He tried the spark and found that by touching the wire to the top of
the cylinder, when the proper connection was, made, that he had a hot,
"fat one."  The compression seemed all right and the supply pipe from
the gasoline tank was in perfect order.  Still the motor would not go.
No explosion resulted when he turned the flywheel over, not even when
he primed the cylinder by putting a little gasoline in through the
cocks on the cylinder heads.

"That's funny," he remarked to himself as he rested from his labors and
contemplated the "dead" motor.  "First time it has gone back on me."
The boat was drifting down the lake, and, at the sound of another motor
craft approaching, Tom looked up.  He saw the RED STREAK, containing
Andy Foger and his cronies.  They had observed the young inventor's
plight.

"Want a tow?"  sneered Andy.

"What'll you take for your second-hand boat that won't run?" asked Pete
Bailey.

"Better get out of the way or you might be run down," added Sam
Snedecker.

Tom was too angry and chagrined to reply, and the RED STREAK swept on.

"I'll make her go, if it takes all night!" declared Tom energetically.
Once more he tried to start the motor.  It coughed and sighed, as if in
protest, but would not explode.  Then Tom cried: "The spark plug!
That's where the trouble is, I'll wager.  Why didn't I think of it
before?"

It was the work of but a minute to unscrew the spark plugs from the
tops of the cylinders.  He found that both had such accumulations of
carbon on them that no spark could ever have reached the mixture of
gasoline and air.

"I'll put new ones in," he decided, for he carried a few spare plugs
for emergencies.  Inside of five minutes, with the new plugs in place,
the motor was running better than before.

"Now for home!"  cried Tom, "and if I meet Andy Foger I'll race him
this time."

But the RED STREAK was not in sight, and, a little later, Tom had run
the ARROW into the boathouse, locked the door and was on his way up to
the mansion.

"I suppose Mrs. Baggert and Garret will be surprised to see me," he
remarked.  "Maybe they'll think we don't trust them, by coming back in
this fashion to see that everything is safe.  But then, I suppose, dad
is naturally nervous about some of his valuable machinery and
inventions.  I think I'll find everything all right, though."

As Tom went up the main path and swung off to a side one, which was a
short cut to the house, he saw in the dusk, for it was now early
evening, a movement in the bushes that lined the walk.

"Hello, Garret!"  exclaimed the lad, taking it for granted it was the
engineer employed by Mr. Swift.

There was no reply, and Tom, with a sudden suspicion, sprang toward the
bushes.  The shrubbery was more violently agitated and, as the lad
reached the screen of foliage, he saw a man spring up from the ground
and take to his heels.

"Here!  Who are you?  What do you want?"  yelled Tom.

Hardly had he spoken when from behind a big apple tree another man
sprung.  It was light enough so that the lad could see his face, and a
glimpse of it caused him to cry out:

"Happy Harry, the tramp!"

Before he could call again the two men had disappeared.




CHAPTER XIII

TOM IN DANGER


"Garret!  Garret Jackson!" cried Tom as he struggled through the hedge
of bushes and ran after the men.  "Where are you, Garret?  Come on and
help me chase these men!"

But there came no answer to Tom's hail.  He could not hear the sound of
the retreating footsteps of the men now and concluded that they had
made their escape.  Still he would not give up, but dashed on, slipping
and stumbling, now and then colliding with a tree.

"What can they be doing here?" thought Tom in great anxiety.  "Are they
after some more of dad's inventions because they didn't get his turbine
motor?"

"Hello!  Who's there?  Who are you?" called a voice suddenly.

"Oh, Garret!  Where have you been?" asked the young inventor,
recognizing the tones of his father's keeper.  "I've been calling you.
Some of those scoundrels are around again!"

"Why if it isn't Tom!" ejaculated the engineer.  "However in the world
did you get here?  I thought you were at Sandport."

"I'll explain later, Garret.  Just now I want to catch those men, if I
can."

"Which men?"

"Happy Harry and another one.  I saw them hiding down by the orchard
path.  Come on, they're right ahead of us."

But though they hunted as well as they were able to in the
fast-gathering darkness, there was no trace of the intruders.  They had
to give up, and Tom, after going to the boathouse to see that the ARROW
was all right, returned to the house, where he told the engineer and
housekeeper what had brought him back and how he had surprised the two
men.

"Is everything all right, Garret?" he concluded.  "Dad is nervous and
frightened.  I must telephone him at the hotel to-night and let him
know, for I promised to come back.  I can't, though, until to-morrow."

"Everything is all right as far as I know," answered Jackson.  "I've
kept a careful watch and the burglar alarm has been in working order.
Mrs. Baggert and I haven't been disturbed a single night since you went
away.  It's curious that the men should be here the very night you come
back.  Maybe they followed you."

"I hardly think so, for they didn't know I was coming."

"You can't tell what those fellows know," commented the engineer.
"But, anyhow, I don't suppose they could have gotten here from Sandport
as soon as you did."

"Oh, yes they could, in their automobile," declared Tom.  "But I don't
believe they knew I was coming.  They knew we were away, however, and
thought it would be a good time to steal something, I guess.  Are you
sure nothing has been taken?"

"Perfectly sure, but you and I will take a look around the shop."

They made a hasty examination, but found nothing disturbed and no signs
that anyone had tried to break in.

"I think I'll telephone dad that everything is all right," decided Tom.
"It is as far as his inventions are concerned, and if I tell about
seeing the men it will only worry him.  I can explain that part better
when I see him.  But when I go back, Garret, you will have to be on
your guard, since those men are in the neighborhood."

"I will, Tom.  Don't worry."

Mr. Swift was soon informed by his son over the telephone that nothing
in the shops had been disturbed, and the inventor received the news
with evident satisfaction.  He requested Tom to come back to the hotel
in the morning, in order that the three of them might go for a ride
about the lake in the afternoon, and Tom decided to make an early start.

The night passed without incident, though Tom, who kept the gun Mr.
Duncan had given him in readiness for use, got up several times,
thinking he heard suspicious noises.  After an early breakfast, and
having once more cautioned the engineer and housekeeper to be on their
guard, Tom started back in the ARROW.

As it would not be much out of his way, the young inventor decided to
cut across the lake and stop at the sanitarium, that he might inquire
about Mr. Duncan.  He thought he could speed the ARROW up sufficiently
to make up for any time he might lose, and, with this in mind, he
headed out toward the middle of Lake Carlopa.  The engine was working
splendidly with the new spark plugs, and Tom was wondering if there was
any possible method of getting more revolutions out of the motor.  He
had about come to the conclusion that a new propeller might answer his
purpose when he heard the noise of an approaching boat.  He looked up
quickly and exclaimed:

"Andy Foger again, and Pete and Sam are with him.  It's a wonder he
wouldn't go off on a trip instead of cruising around so near home.
Guess he's afraid he'll get stuck."

Idly Tom watched the RED STREAK.  It was cutting through the water at a
fast rate, throwing up curling foam on either side of the sharp bow.
"He seems to be heading this way," mused Tom.  "Well, I'm not going to
race with him to-day."

Nearer and nearer came the speedy craft, straight for the ARROW.  The
young inventor shifted his helm in order to get out of Andy's course,
but to his surprise he saw that the red haired lad changed the
direction of his own boat.

"Guess he wants to see how close he can come to me," thought our hero.
"Maybe he wants to show how fast he's going."

The RED STREAK was now so close that the features of the occupants
could easily be distinguished.  There were grins on the faces of Andy
and his cronies.

"Get out of the way or we'll run you down!" cried the bully.  "We've
got the right of way."

"Don't you try anything like that!" shouted Tom in some alarm, not that
he was afraid of Andy, but the RED STREAK was getting dangerously near,
and he knew Andy was not a skillful helmsman.  The auto-boat was now
headed directly at the ARROW and coming on speedily.  Andy was bending
over the wheel and Tom had begun to turn his, in order to get well out
of the way of the insolent, squint-eyed lad and his friends.

Suddenly Andy uttered a cry and leaped up.

"Look out!  Look out!" he yelled.  "My steering gear has broken!  I
can't change my course.  Look out!"

The RED STREAK was bearing right down on Tom's boat.

"Shut off your power!  Reverse!" shouted Tom.

Andy seemed confused and did not know what to do.  Sam Snedecker sprang
to the side of his crony, but he knew even less about a motor-boat.  It
looked as if Tom would be run down, and he was in great danger.

But the young inventor did not lose his head.  He put his wheel hard
over and then, leaping to his motor, sent it full speed forward.  Not a
moment too soon had he acted, for an instant later the other boat shot
past the stern of the ARROW, hitting it a severe but glancing blow.
Tom's boat quivered from end to end and he quickly shut off the power.
By this time Andy had succeeded in slowing down his craft.  The young
inventor hastily looked over the side of the ARROW.  One of the rudder
fastenings had been torn loose.

"What do you mean by running me down?" shouted Tom angrily.

"I--I didn't do it on purpose," returned Andy contritely.  "I was
seeing how near I could come to you when my steering gear broke.  I
hope I haven't damaged you."

"My rudder's broken," went on Tom "and I've got to put back to repair
it.  I ought to have you arrested for this!"

"I'll pay for the damage," replied Andy, and he was so frightened that
he was white, in spite of his tan and freckles.

"That won't do me any good now," retorted Tom.  "It will delay me a
couple of hours.  If you try any tricks like that again, I'll complain
to the authorities and you won't be allowed to run a boat on this lake."

Andy knew that his rival was in the right and did not reply.  The bully
and his cronies busied themselves over the broken steering gear, and
the young inventor, finding that he could make a shift to get back to
his boathouse, turned his craft around and headed for there, in order
to repair the damage.




CHAPTER XIV

THE ARROW DISAPPEARS


Paying no heed to the occupants of the bully's boat, who, by reason of
their daring, had been responsible for his accident that might have
resulted seriously, Tom was soon at his dock.  He had it conveniently
arranged for hoisting craft out of the water to repair them, and in a
few minutes the stern of the ARROW was elevated so that he could get at
the rudder.

"Well, it's not as bad as I thought," he remarked when, with critical
eye, he had noted the damage done.  "I can fix it in about an hour if
Garret helps me."

Going up to the house to get some tools and to tell the engineer that
he had returned, Tom looked out over the lake and saw Andy's boat
moving slowly off.

"They've got her fixed up in some kind of shape," he murmured.  "It's a
shame for a chump like Andy to have a good boat like that.  He'll spoil
it in one season.  He's getting altogether too reckless.  First thing
he knows, he and I will have a clash and I'll pay back some of the old
scores."

Mr. Jackson was much surprised to see the young inventor home again so
soon, as was also Mrs. Baggert.  Tom explained what had happened, and
he and the engineer went to work repairing the damage done by the RED
STREAK.  As the owner of the ARROW had anticipated, the work did not
take long, and, shortly before dinner time, the boat was ready to
resume the interrupted trip to Sandport.

"Better stay and have lunch," urged Mrs. Baggert.  "You can hardly get
to the hotel by night, anyhow, and maybe it would be better not to
start until to-morrow."

"No, I must get back to-night or dad would be worried," declared Tom.
"I've been gone longer now than I calculated on.  But I will have
dinner here, and, if necessary, I can do the last half of the trip
after dark.  I know the way now and I have a compass and a good
searchlight."

The ARROW was let down into the water again and tied outside the
boathouse ready for a quick start.  The dinner Mrs. Baggert provided
was so good that Tom lingered over it longer than he meant to, and he
asked for a second apple dumpling with hard sauce on.  So it was with a
very comfortable feeling indeed and with an almost forgiving spirit
toward Andy Foger that our hero started down the path to the lake.

"Now for a quick run to Sandport," he said aloud.  "I hope I shan't see
any more of those men and that dad hasn't been bothered by them.  His
suspicions about the house weren't altogether unfounded, for I did see
the tramp and some one else sneaking around, but I don't believe
they'll come back now."

Tom swung around the path that led to the dock.  As he came in sight of
the water, he stared as if he could not believe what he saw, or,
rather, what he did not see.  For there was no craft tied to the
string-piece, where he had fastened his motor-boat.  He looked again,
rubbed his eyes to make sure and then cried out:

"The ARROW is gone!"

There was no doubt of it.  The craft was not at the dock.  Breaking
into a run, Tom hastened to the boathouse.  The ARROW was not in there,
and a look across the lake showed only a few rowboats in sight.

"That's mighty funny," mused the youth.  "I wonder--"

He paused suddenly in his thoughts.

"Maybe Garret took it out to try and see that it worked all right," he
said hopefully.  "He knows how to run a boat.  Maybe he wanted to see
how the rudder behaved and is out in it now.  He got through dinner
before I did.  But I should have thought he'd have said something to me
if he was going out in it."

This was the one weak point in Tom's theory, and he felt it at once.

"I'll see if Garret is in his shop," he went on as he turned back
toward the house.

The first person he met as he headed for the group of small structures
where Mr. Swift's inventive work was carried on was Garret Jackson, the
engineer.

"I--I thought you were out in my boat!" stammered Tom.

"Your boat!  Why would I be out in your boat?" and Mr. Jackson removed
his pipe from his mouth and stared at the young inventor.

"Because it's gone!"

"Gone!" repeated the engineer, and then Tom told him.  The two hurried
down to the dock, but the addition of another pair of eyes was of no
assistance in locating the ARROW.  The trim little motor craft was
nowhere to be seen.

"I can't understand it," said Tom helplessly.  "I wasn't gone more than
an hour at dinner, and yet--"

"It doesn't take long to steal a motor-boat," commented the engineer.

"But I think I would have heard them start it," went on the lad.
"Maybe it drifted off, though I'm sure I tied it securely."

"No, there's not much likelihood of that.  There's no wind to-day and
no currents in the lake.  But it could easily have been towed off by
some one in a rowboat and then you would not have heard the motor
start."

"That's so," agreed the youth.  "That's probably how they did it.  They
sneaked up here in a rowboat and towed the ARROW off.  I'm sure of it."

"And I'll wager I know who did it," exclaimed Mr. Jackson energetically.

"Who?" demanded Tom quickly.

"Those men who were sneaking around--Happy Harry and his gang.  They
stole the boat once and they'd do it again.  Those men took your boat,
Tom."

The young inventor shook his head.

"No," he answered, "I don't believe they did."

"Why not?"

"Well, because they wouldn't dare come back here when they knew we're
on the lookout for them.  It would be too risky."

"Oh, those fellows don't care for risk," was the opinion of Mr.
Jackson.  "Take my word for it, they have your boat.  They have been
keeping watch, and as soon as they saw the dock unprotected they
sneaked up and stole the ARROW."

"I don't think so," repeated Mr. Swift's son.

"Who do you think took it then?"

"Andy Foger!" was the quick response.  "I believe he and his cronies
did it to annoy me.  They have been trying to get even with me-or at
least Andy has--for outbidding him on this boat.  He's tried several
times, but he hasn't succeeded--until now.  I'm sure Andy Foger has my
boat," and Tom, with a grim tightening of his lips, swung around as
though to start in instant pursuit.

"Where are you going?" asked Mr. Jackson.

"To find Andy and his cronies.  When I locate them I'll make them tell
me where my boat is."

"Hadn't you better send some word to your father?  You can hardly get
to Sandport now, and he'll be worried about you."

"That's so, I will.  I'll telephone dad that the boat--no, I'll not do
that either, for he'd only worry and maybe get sick.  I'll just tell
him I've had a little accident, that Andy ran into me and that I can't
come back to the hotel for a day or two.  Maybe I'll be lucky to find
my boat in that time.  But dad won't worry then, and, when I see him, I
can explain.  That's what I'll do," and Tom was soon talking to Mr.
Swift by telephone.

The inventor was very sorry his son could not come back to rejoin him
and Ned, but there was no help for it, and, with as cheerful voice as
he could assume, the lad promised to start for Sandport at the earliest
opportunity.

"Now to find Andy and my boat!" Tom exclaimed as he hung up the
telephone receiver.




CHAPTER XV

A DISMAYING STATEMENT


Trouble is sometimes good in a way; it makes a person resourceful.  Tom
Swift had had his share of annoyances of late, but they had served a
purpose.  He had learned to think clearly and quickly.  Now, when he
found his boat stolen, he at once began to map out a plan of action.

"What will you do first?" asked Mr. Jackson as he saw his employer's
son hesitating.

"First I'm going to Andy Foger's house," declared the young inventor.
"If he's home I'm going to tell him what I think of him.  If he's not,
I'm going to find him."

"Why don't you take your sailboat and run down to his dock?" suggested
the engineer.  "It isn't as quick as your motor-boat, but it's better
than walking."

"So it is," exclaimed the lad.  "I will use my catboat.  I had
forgotten all about it of late.  I'm glad you spoke."

He was soon sailing down the lake in the direction of the boathouse on
the waterfront of Mr. Foger's property.  It needed but a glance around
the dock to show him that the RED STREAK was not there, but Tom
recollected the accident to the steering gear and thought perhaps Andy
had taken his boat to some wharf where there was a repair shop and
there left it to return home himself.  But inquiry of Mrs. Foger, who
was as nice a woman as her son was a mean lad, gave Tom the information
that his enemy was not at home.

"He telephoned to me that his boat was damaged," said Mrs. Foger
gently, "and that he had taken it to get fixed.  Then, he said, he and
some friends were going on a little cruise and might not be back
to-night."

"Did he say where he was going?" asked our hero, who did not tell
Andy's mother why he wanted to see her son.

"No, and I'm worried about him.  Sometimes I think Andy is too--well,
too impetuous, and I'm afraid he will get into trouble."

Tom, in spite of his trouble, could hardly forbear smiling.  Andy's
mother was totally unaware of the mean traits of her son and thought
him a very fine chap.  Tom was not going to undeceive her.

"I'm afraid something will happen to him," she went on.  "Do you think
there is any danger being out on the lake in a motor-boat, Mr. Swift?
I understand you have one."

"Yes, I have one," answered Tom.  He was going to say he had once had
one, but thought better of it.  "No, there is very little danger this
time of year," he added.

"I am very glad to hear you say so," went on Mrs. Foger with a sigh.
"I shall feel more at ease when Andy is away now.  When he returns
home, I shall tell him you called upon him and he will return your
visit.  I am glad to see that the custom of paying calls has not died
out among the present generation.  It is a pleasant habit, and I am
glad to have my son conform to it.  He shall return your kind visit."

"Oh, no, it's of no consequence," replied Tom quickly, thinking grimly
that his visit was far from a friendly one.  "There is no need to tell
your son I was here.  I will probably see him in a day or two.

"Oh, but I shall tell him," insisted Mrs. Foger with a kind smile.
"I'm sure he will appreciate your call."

There was much doubt concerning this in the mind of the young inventor,
but he did not express it and soon took his leave.  Up and down the
lake for the rest of the day he cruised, looking in vain for a sight of
Andy Foger in the RED STREAK, but the racing boat appeared to be well
hidden.

"If I only could find where they've taken mine," mused Tom.  "Hang it
all, this is rotten luck!" and for the first time he began to feel
discouraged.

"Maybe you'd better notify the police," suggested Mr. Jackson when Tom
returned to the Swift house that night.  "They might help locate it."

"I think I can do as well as the police," answered the youth.  "If the
boat is anywhere it's on the lake, and the police have no craft in
which to make a search."

"That's so," agreed the engineer.  "I wish I could help you, but I
don't believe it would be wise for me to leave the house, especially
since those men have been about lately."

"No, you must stay here," was Tom's opinion.  "I'll take another day or
two to search.  By this time Andy and his gang will return, I'm sure,
and I can tackle them."

"Suppose they don't?"

"Well, then I'll make a tour of the lake in my sailboat and I'll run up
to Sandport and tell dad, for he will wonder what's keeping me.  I'll
know better next time than to leave my boat at the dock without taking
out the connection at the spark coil, so no one can start the motor.  I
should have done that at first, but you always think of those things
afterward."

The lad began his search again the next morning and cruised about in
little bays and gulfs looking for a sight of the RED STREAK or the
ARROW, but he saw neither, and a call at Andy's house showed that the
red-haired youth had not returned.  Mrs. Foger was quite nervous over
her son's continued absence, but Mr. Foger thought it was all right.

Another day passed without any results and the young inventor was
getting so nervous, partly with worrying over the loss of his boat and
partly on his father's account, that he did not know what to do.

"I can't stand it any longer," he announced to Mrs. Baggert the night
of the third day, after a telephone message had been received from Mr.
Swift.  The inventor wanted to know why his son did not return to the
hotel to join him and Ned.  "Well, what will you do?" asked the
housekeeper.

"If I don't find my boat to-morrow, I'll sail to Sandport, bring home
dad and Ned and we three will go all over the lake.  My boat must be on
it somewhere, but Lake Carlopa is so cut up that it could easily be
hidden."

"It's queer that the Foger boy doesn't come home.  That makes it look
as if he was guilty."

"Oh, I'm sure he took it all right," returned Tom.  "All I want is to
see him.  It certainly is queer that he stays away as long as he does.
Sam Snedecker and Pete Bailey are with him, too.  But they'll have to
return some time."

Tom dreamed that night of finding his boat and that it was a wreck.  He
awoke, glad to find that the latter part was not true, but wishing that
some of his night vision might come to pass during the day.

He started out right after breakfast, and, as usual, headed for the
Foger home.  He almost disliked to ask Mrs. Foger if her son had yet
returned, for Andy's mother was so polite and so anxious to know
whether any danger threatened that Tom hardly knew how to answer her.
But he was saved that embarrassment on this occasion, for as he was
going up the walk from the lake to the residence he met the gardener
and from him learned that Andy had not yet come back.

"But his mother had a message from him, I did hear," went on the man.
"He's on his way.  It seems he had some trouble."

"Trouble.  What kind of trouble?" asked Tom.

"I don't rightly know, sir, but," and here the gardener winked his eye,
"Master Andy isn't particular what kind of trouble he gets into."

"That's right," agreed our hero, and as he went down again to where he
had left his boat he thought: "Nor what kind of trouble he gets other
people into.  I wish I had hold of him for about five minutes!"

The sailboat swung slowly from the dock and heeled over to the gentle
breeze.  Hardly knowing what to do, Tom headed for the middle of the
lake.  He was discouraged and tired of making plans only to have them
fail.

As he looked across the stretch of water he saw a boat coming toward
him.  He shaded his eyes with his hand to see better, and then, with a
pair of marine glasses, took an observation.  He uttered an exclamation.

"That's the RED STREAK as sure as I'm alive!" he cried.  "But what's
the matter with her?  They're rowing!"

The lad headed his boat toward the approaching one.  There was no doubt
about it.  It was Andy Foger's craft, but it was not speeding forward
under the power of the motor.  Slowly and laborious the occupants were
pulling it along, and as it was not meant to be rowed, progress was
very slow.

"They've had a breakdown," thought Tom. "Serves 'em right!  Now wait
till I tackle 'em and find out where my boat is.  I've a good notion to
have Andy Foger arrested!"

The sailing craft swiftly approached the motor-boat.  Tom could see the
three occupants looking at him, apprehensively as well as curiously, he
thought.

"Guess they didn't think I'd keep after 'em," mused the young inventor,
and a little later he was beside the RED STREAK.

"Well," cried Tom angrily, "it's about time you came back!"

"We've had a breakdown," remarked Andy, and he seemed quite humiliated.
He was beginning to find out that he didn't know as much about a
motor-boat as he thought he did.

"I've been waiting for you," went on Tom.

"Waiting for us?  What for?" asked Sam Snedecker.

"What for?  As if you didn't know!" blurted out the owner of the ARROW.
"I want my boat, Andy Foger, the one you stole from me and hid!  Tell
me where it is at once or I'll have you arrested!"

"Your boat!" repeated the bully, and there was no mistaking the
surprise in his tones.

"Yes, my boat!  Don't try to bluff me like that."

"I'm not trying to bluff you.  We've been away, three days and just got
back."

"Yes, I know you have.  You took my boat with you, too."

"Are you crazy?" demanded Pete Bailey.

"No, but you fellows must have been to think you could take my boat and
me not know it," and Tom, filled with wrath, grasped the gunwale of the
RED STREAK as if he feared it would suddenly shoot away.

"Look here!" burst out Andy, and he spoke sincerely, "we didn't touch
your boat.  Did we, fellows?"

"No!" exclaimed Sam and Pete at once, and they were very much in
earnest.

"We didn't even know it was stolen, did we?" went on Andy.

"No," agreed his chums.  Tom looked unconvinced.

"We haven't taken your boat and we can prove it," continued the bully.
"I know you and I have had quarrels, but I'm telling you the truth, Tom
Swift.  I never touched your boat."

There was no mistaking the sincerity of Andy.  He was not a skilful
deceiver, and Tom, looking into his squint-eyes, which were opened
unusually wide, could not but help believing the fellow.

"We haven't seen it since the day we had the collision," added Andy,
and his chums confirmed this statement.

"We went off on a little cruise," continued the red-haired bully, "and
broke down several times.  We had bad luck.  Just as we were nearing
home something went wrong with the engine again.  I never saw such a
poor motor.  But we never took your boat, Tom Swift, and we can prove
it."

Tom was in despair.  He had been so sure that Andy was the thief, that
to believe otherwise was difficult.  Yet he felt that he must.  He
looked at the disabled motor of the RED STREAK and viewed it with the
interested and expert eye of a machinist, no matter if the owner of it
was his enemy.  Then suddenly a brilliant idea came into Tom's head.




CHAPTER XVI

STILL ON THE SEARCH


"You seem to have lots of trouble with your boat, Andy," said Tom after
a few moments of rather embarrassed silence.

"I do," admitted the owner of the RED STREAK.  "I've had bad luck ever
since I got it, but usually I've been able to fix it by looking in the
book.  This time I can't find out what the trouble is, nor can any of
the fellows.  It stopped when we were out in the middle of the lake and
we had to row.  I'm sick of motor boating."

"Suppose I fix it for you?" went on Tom.

"If you do, I'll pay you well."

"I wouldn't do it for pay--not the kind you mean," continued the young
inventor.

"What do you mean then?" and Andy's face, that had lighted up, became
glum again.

"Well, if I fix your boat for you, will you let me run it a little
while?"

"You mean show me how to run it?"

"No, I mean take it myself.  Look here, Andy, my boat's been stolen,
and I thought you took it to get even with me.  You say you didn't--"

"And I didn't touch it," interposed the squint-eyed lad quickly.

"All right, I believe you.  But somebody stole it, and I think I know
who."

"Who?" asked Sam Snedecker.

"Well, you wouldn't know if I told you, but I suspect some men with
whom I had trouble before," and Tom referred to Happy Harry and his
gang.  "I think they have my boat on this lake, and I'd like to get
another speedy craft to cruise about it and make a further search.  How
about it, Andy?  If I fix your boat, will you let me take it to look
for my boat?"

"Sure thing!" agreed the bully quickly, and his voice for once was
friendly toward Tom.  "Fix the engine so it will run, and you can use
the RED STREAK as long as you like."

"Oh, I probably wouldn't want it very long.  I could cover the lake in
about three days, and I hope by that time I could locate the thieves.
Is it a bargain?"

"Sure," agreed Andy again, and Tom got into the motor-boat to look at
the engine.  He found that it would require some time to adjust it
properly and that it would be necessary to take the motor apart.

"I think I'd better tow you to my dock," the young inventor said to
Andy.  "I can use some tools from the shop then, and by to-night I'll
have the RED STREAK in running order."

The breeze was in the right quarter, fortunately, and with the
motor-boat dragging behind, the ARROW's owner put the nose of the
sailing craft toward his home dock.

When Tom reached his house he found that Mrs. Baggert had received
another telephone message from Mr. Swift, inquiring why his son had not
returned to Sandport.

"He says if you don't come back by to-morrow," repeated the
housekeeper, "that he'll come home by train.  He's getting anxious, I
believe."

"Shouldn't wonder," admitted Tom.  "But I want him to stay there.  The
change will do him good.  I'll soon have my boat back, now that I can
go about the lake swiftly, and then I'll join him.  I'll tell him to be
patient."

Tom talked with his father at some length, assuring him that everything
was well at the Shopton house and promising to soon be with him.  Then
the young inventor began work on the motor of the RED STREAK.  He found
it quite a job and had to call on Mr. Jackson to help him, for one of
the pistons had to be repaired and a number of adjustments made to the
cylinders.

But that night the motor was fully mended and placed back in the boat.
It was in better shape than it had been since Andy had purchased the
craft.

"There," remarked Tom, "now I'm ready to hunt for those scoundrels.
Will you leave your boat at my dock to-night, Andy?"

"Yes, so you can start out early in the morning.  I'm not going."

"Why not?" demanded Tom quickly.

"Well--er--you see I've had enough of motoring for a while," explained
Andy.  "Besides, I don't believe my mother would like me to go out on a
chase after thieves.  If we had to shoot I might hit one of them, and--"

"Oh, I see," answered Tom.  "But I don't like to take your boat alone.
Besides, I don't fancy there will be much shooting.  I know I'm not
going to take a gun.  In fact, the one Mr. Duncan gave me is in the
boat.  All I want is to get the ARROW back."

"That's all right," went on Andy.  "You take my boat and use it as long
as you like.  I'll rest up a few days.  When you find your boat you can
bring mine back."

Tom understood.  He was just as glad not to have Andy accompany him in
the chase, as he and the red-haired lad had never been good friends and
probably never would be.  So it would cause some embarrassment to be
together in a boat all day.  Then again Tom knew he could manage the
RED STREAK better alone, but, of course, he did not want to mention
this when he asked for the loan of the craft.  Andy's own suggestion,
however, had solved the difficulty.  Tom had an idea that Andy felt a
little timid about going in pursuit of the thieves, but naturally it
would not do to mention this, for the squint-eyed lad considered
himself quite a fighter.

Early the next morning, alone in the RED STREAK, Tom continued the
search for his stolen boat.  He started out from his home dock and
mapped out a course that would take him well around the lake.

"I s'pose I could take a run to Sandport now," mused the youth as he
shot in and out of the little bays, keeping watch for the ARROW.  "But
if I do dad will have to be told all about it, and, he'll worry.  Then,
too, he might want to accompany me, and I think I can manage this
better alone, for the RED STREAK will run faster with only one in.  I
ought to wind up this search in two days, if my boat is still on the
lake.  And if those scoundrels have sunk her I'll make them pay for it."

On shot the speedy motor-boat, in and out along the winding shoreline,
with the lad in the bow at the steering-wheel peering with eager eyes
into every nook and corner where his craft might be hidden.




CHAPTER XVII

"THERE SHE IS!"


Anticipating that he would be some time on his search, the young
inventor had gone prepared for it.  He had a supply of provisions and
he had told Mrs. Baggert he might not be back that night.  But he did
not intend to sleep aboard the RED STREAK, which, being a racing boat,
was not large enough to afford much room for passengers.  Tom had
planned, therefore, to put up at some hotel near the lake in case his
hunt should last beyond one night.

That it would do this was almost certain, for all that morning he
searched unavailingly for the ARROW.  A distant mill whistle sounding
over Lake Carlopa told him it was noon.

"Dinner time," he announced to himself.  "Guess I'll run up along shore
in the shade and eat."

Selecting a place where the trees overhung the water, forming a quiet,
cool nook, Tom sent the boat in there, and, tying it to a leaning tree,
he began his simple meal.  Various thoughts filled his mind, but chief
among them was the desire to overtake the thieves who had his boat.
That it was Happy Harry's gang he was positive.

The lad nearly finished eating and was considering what direction he
might best search in next when he heard, running along a road that
bordered the lake, an automobile.

"Wonder who that is?" mused Tom.  "It won't do any harm to take a look,
for it might be some of those thieves again.  They probably still have
their auto or Happy Harry couldn't have gotten from Sandport to Shopton
so quickly."

The young inventor slipped ashore from the motor-boat, taking care to
make no noise.  Stealing silently along toward the road, he peered
through the underbrush for a sight of the machine, which seemed to be
going slowly.  But before the youth had a glimpse of it he was made
aware who the occupant was by hearing someone exclaim:

"Bless my shoe laces if this cantankerous contraption isn't going wrong
again!  I wonder if it's going to have a fit here in this lonely place.
It acts just as if it was.  Bless my very existence! Hold on now.  Be
nice!  Be nice!"

"Mr. Damon!" exclaimed Tom, and, without knowing it, he had spoken
aloud.

"Hold on there!  Hold on!  Who's calling me in this forsaken locality?
Bless my shirt studs!  But who is it?" and the eccentric man who had
sold Tom the motor-cycle looked intently at the bushes.

"Here I am, Mr. Damon," answered the lad, stepping out into the road.
"I knew it was you as soon as I saw you."

"Bless my liver, but that's very true!  I suppose you heard my
unfortunate automobile puffing along.  I declare I don't know what ails
it.  I got it on the advice of my physician, who said I must get out in
the air, but, bless my gears, it's the auto who needs a doctor more
than I do!  It's continually out of order.  Something is going to
happen right away.  I can tell by the way it's behaving."

Mr. Damon had thrown out the clutch, but the engine was still running,
though in a jerky, uncertain fashion, which indicated to the trained
ear of the young inventor that something was wrong.

"Perhaps I can fix it for you as I did before," ventured Tom.

"Bless my eyebrows!  Perhaps you can," cried the eccentric man
hopefully.  "You always seem to turn up at the right moment.  How do
you manage it?"

"I don't know.  I remember the time you turned up just when I wanted
you to help me capture Happy Harry and his gang, and now, by, a strange
coincidence, I'm after them again."

"You don't say so!  My good gracious!  Bless my hatband!  But that's
odd.  There!" he ejaculated suddenly as the automobile engine stopped
with a choking sigh, "I knew something was going to happen."

"Let me take a look," proposed the lad, and he was soon busy peering
into the interior of the machine.  At first he could not find the
trouble, but being a persistent youth, Tom went at it systematically
and located it in two places.  The clutch was not rightly adjusted and
the carburetor float feed needed fixing.  The young inventor was not
long in making the slight repairs and then he assured Mr. Damon that
his automobile would run properly.

"Bless my very existence, but what a thing it is to have a head for
mechanics!" exclaimed the odd man gratefully.  "Now it would bother me
to adjust a nutmeg grater if it got out of order, but I dare say you
could fix it in no time."

"Yes," answered Tom, "I could and so could you, for there's nothing
about it to fix.  But you can go ahead now if you wish."

"Thank you.  It just shows how ignorant I am of machinery.  I presume
something will go wrong in another mile or two.  But may I ask what you
are doing here?  I presume you are in your motor-boat, sailing about
for pleasure.  And didn't I understand you to say you were after those
chaps again?  Bless my watch charm, but I was so interested in my
machine that I didn't think to ask you."

"Yes, I am after those thieves again."

"In your motor-boat, I presume.  Well, I hope you catch them.  What
have they stolen now?"

"My motor-boat.  That's why I'm after them, but I had to borrow a craft
to chase them with."

"Bless my soul!  You don't tell me!  How did it happen?"

Thereupon the lad related as much of the story as was necessary to put
Mr. Damon in possession of the facts and he ended up with:

"I don't suppose you have seen anything of the men in my boat, have
you?"

Mr. Damon seemed strangely excited.  He had entered his auto, but as
the lad's story progressed the odd gentleman had descended.  When Tom
finished he exclaimed:

"Don't say a word now--not a word.  I want to think, and that is a
process, which, for me, requires a little time.  Don't speak a word
now.  Bless my left hand, but I think I can help you!"

He frowned, stamped first one foot, then the other, looked up at the
sky, as if seeking inspiration there, and then down at the ground, as
if that would help him to think.  Then he clapped his hands smartly
together and cried out:

"Bless my shoe buttons!"

"Have you seen them?" asked Tom eagerly.

"Was your boat one with a red arrow painted on the bow?" asked Mr.
Damon in turn.

"It was!" and the lad was now almost as excited as was his friend.

"Then I've seen it and, what's more, this morning!  Bless my spark
plug, I've seen it!"

"Tell me about it!" pleaded the young inventor, and Mr. Damon, calming
himself after an effort, resumed:

"I was out for an early spin in my auto," he said, "and was traveling
along a road that bordered the lake, about fifteen miles above here.  I
heard a motor-boat puffing along near shore, and, looking through the
trees, I saw one containing three men.  It had a red arrow on the bow,
and that's why I noticed it, because I recalled that your boat was
named the DART."

"ARROW," corrected Tom.

"The ARROW.  Oh, yes, I knew it was something like that.  Well of
course at the time I didn't think that it was your boat, but I
associated it in my mind with yours.  Do you catch my meaning?"

Tom did and said so, wishing Mr. Damon would hurry and get to the
point.  But the eccentric character had to do things in his own way.

"Exactly," he resumed. "Well, I didn't think that was your boat, but,
at the same time, I watched the men out of curiosity, and I was struck
with their behavior. They seemed to be quarreling, and, from what I
could hear, two of them seemed to be remonstrating with the third one
for having taken some sort of a piece of wood from the forward
compartment. I believe that is the proper term."

"Yes!" Tom almost shouted.  "But where did they go?  What became of
them?  What was the man doing to the forward compartment--where the
gasoline tank is?"

"Exactly.  I was trying to think what was kept there.  That's it, the
gasoline tank.  Well, the boat kept on up the lake, and I don't know
what became of the men.  But about that piece of wood.  It seems that
one of the men removed a block, from under the tank and the others
objected.  That's why they were quarreling."

"That's very strange," exclaimed the lad.  "There must be some mystery
about my boat that I don't understand.  But that will keep until I get
the boat itself.  Good-by, Mr. Damon.  I must be off."

"Where to?"

"Up the lake after those thieves.  I must lose no time," and Tom
started to go back to where he had left the RED STREAK.

"Hold on!" cried Mr. Damon.  "I have something to propose, Tom.  Two
heads are better than one, even if one doesn't know how to adjust a
nutmeg grate.  Suppose I come along with you?  I can point out the
direction the men took, at any rate."

"I'll be very glad to have you," answered the lad, who felt that he
might need help if there were three of the thieves in his craft.  "But
what will you do with your automobile?"

"I'll just run it down the road a way to where a friend of mine has a
stable.  I'll leave it in there and join you.  Will you let me come?
Bless my eye glasses, but I'd like to help catch those scoundrels!"

"I'll be very glad to have you.  Go ahead, put the auto in the barn and
I'll wait for you."

"I have a better plan than that," replied Mr. Damon.  "Run your boat
down to that point," and he indicated one about a mile up the lake.
"I'll be there waiting for you, and we'll lose no time.  I can cover
the ground faster in my auto than you can in your boat."

Tom saw the advantage of this and was soon under way, while he heard on
shore the puffing of his friend's car.  On the trip to the point Tom
puzzled over the strange actions of the man in taking one of the braces
from under the gasoline tank.

"I'll wager he did it before," thought the lad.  "It must be the same
person who was tampering with the lock of the forward compartment the
day I bought the boat.  But why--that's the question--why?"

He could find no answer to this, puzzle over it as he did, and he gave
it up.  His whole desire now was to get on the trail of the thieves,
and he had strong hopes, after the clew Mr. Damon had given him.  The
latter was waiting for him on the point, and so nimble was the owner of
the auto, in spite of his size, that Tom was not delayed more than the
fraction of a minute ere he was under way again, speeding up the lake.

"Now keep well in toward shore," advised Mr. Damon.  "Those fellows
don't want to be observed any more than they can help, and they'll
sneak along the bank, They were headed in that direction," and he
pointed it out.  "Now I hope you won't think I'm in the way.  Besides,
you know, if you get your boat back, you'll want some one to help steer
it, while you run this one.  I can do that, at all events, bless my
very existence!"

"I am very glad of your help," replied the lad, but he did not take his
eyes from the water before him, and he was looking for a sight of his
boat with the men in it.

For three hours or more Tom and Mr. Damon cruised in and out along the
shore of the lake, going farther and farther up the body of water.  Tom
was beginning to think that he would reach Sandport without catching
sight of the thieves, and he was wondering if, after all, he might not
better stop off and see his father when, above the puffing of the motor
in the RED STREAK, he heard the put-put of another boat.

"Listen!" cried Mr. Damon, who had heard it at the same time.

Tom nodded.

"They're just ahead of us," whispered his companion.

"If it's them," was the lad's reply.

"Speed up and we'll soon see," suggested Mr. Damon, and Tom shoved the
timer over.  The RED STREAK forged ahead.  The sound of the other boat
came more plainly now.  It was beyond a little point of land.  The
young inventor steered out to get around it and leaned eagerly forward
to catch the first glimpse of the unseen craft.  Would it prove to be
the ARROW?

The put-put became louder now.  Mr. Damon was standing up, as if that
would, in some mysterious way, help.  Then suddenly the other boat came
into view.  Tom saw it in an instant and knew it for the ARROW.

"There she is!" he cried.




CHAPTER XVIII

THE PURSUIT


For an instant after Tom's exultant cry the men in the boat ahead were
not aware that they were being pursued.  Then, as the explosions from
the motor of the RED STREAK sounded over the water, they turned to see
who was coming up behind them.  There was no mistaking the attitude of
the young inventor and his companion.  They were leaning eagerly
forward, as if they could reach out and grasp the criminals who were
fleeing before them.

"Put on all the speed you can, Tom!" begged Mr. Damon.  "We'll catch
the scoundrels now.  Speed up the motor!  Oh, if I only had my
automobile now.  Bless my crank shaft, but one can go so much faster on
land than on water."

The lad did not reply, but thought, with grim humor, that running an
automobile over Lake Carlopa would be no small feat.  Mr. Damon,
however, knew what he was saying.

"We'll catch them!  We'll nab 'em!" he cried.  "Speed her up, Tom."

The youth was doing his best with the motor of the RED STREAK.  He was
not as well acquainted with it as he was with the one in his boat, but
he knew, even better than Andy Foger, how to make it do efficient work.
It was a foregone conclusion that the RED STREAK, if rightly handled,
could beat the ARROW, but there were several points in favor of the
thieves.  The motor of Tom's boat was in perfect order, and even an
amateur, with some knowledge of a boat, could make it do nearly its
best.  On the other hand, the RED STREAK's machinery needed "nursing."
Again, the thieves had a good start, and that counted for much.  But
Tom counted on two other points.  One was that Happy Harry and his gang
would probably know little about the fine points of a motor.  They had
shown this in letting the motor of the boat they had first stolen get
out of order, and Tom knew the ins and outs of a gasoline engine to
perfection.  So the chase was not so hopeless as it seemed.

"Do you think you can catch them?" asked Mr. Damon anxiously.

"I'm going to make a big try," answered his companion.

"They're heading out into the middle of the lake!" cried the eccentric
man.

"If they do, I can cut them off!" murmured Tom as he put the wheel over.

But whoever was steering the ARROW knew better than to send it on a
course that would enable the pursuing boat to cut across and shorten
the distance to it.  After sending the stolen craft far enough out from
shore to clear points of land that jutted out into the lake, the
leading boat was sent straight ahead.

"A stern chase and a long chase!" murmured Mr. Damon.  "Bless my
rudder, but those fellows are not going to give up easily."

"I guess not," murmured Tom.  "Will you steer for a while, Mr. Damon?"

"Of course I will.  If I could get out and pull the boat after me, to
make it go faster, I would.  But as I always lose my breath when I run,
perhaps it's just as well that I stay in here."  Tom thought so too,
but his attention was soon given to the engine.  He adjusted the timer
to get if possible a little more speed out of the boat he had borrowed
from Andy, and he paid particular attention to the oiling system.

"We're going a bit faster!" called Mr. Damon' encouragingly, "or else
they're slacking up."

Tom peered ahead to see if this was so.  It was hard to judge whether
he was overhauling the ARROW, as it was a stern chase, and that is
always difficult to judge.  But a glimpse along shore showed him that
they were slipping through the water at a faster speed.

"They're up to something!" suddenly exclaimed Mr. Damon a moment later.
"I believe they're going to fire on us, Tom.  They are pointing
something this way."

The lad stood up and gazed earnestly at his boat, which seemed to be
slipping away from him so fast.  One of the occupants was in the stern,
aiming some glittering object at those in the RED STREAK.  For a moment
Tom thought it might be a gun.  Then, as the man turned, he saw what it
was.

"A pair of marine glasses," cried the lad.  "They're trying to make out
who we are."

"I guess they know well enough," rejoined Mr. Damon.  "Can't you go any
faster, Tom?"

"I'm afraid not.  But we'll land them, sooner or later.  They can't go
very far in this direction without running ashore and we'll have them.
They're cutting across the lake now."

"They may escape us if it gets dark.  Probably that's what they're
working for.  They want to keep ahead of us until nightfall."

The young inventor thought of this too, but there was little he could
do.  The motor was running at top speed.  It could be made to go
faster, Tom knew, with another ignition system, but that was out of the
question now.

The man with the glasses had resumed his seat, and the efforts of the
trio seemed concentrated on the motor of the ARROW.  They, too, wished
to go faster.  But they had not skill enough to accomplish it, and in
about ten minutes, when Tom took another long and careful look to
ascertain if possible whether or not he was overhauling the thieves, he
was delighted to see that the distance between the boats had lessened.

"We're catching them!  We're creeping up on them!" cried Mr. Damon.
"Keep it up, Tom."  There was nothing to do, however, save wait.  The
boat ahead had shifted her course somewhat and was now turning in
toward the shore, for the lake was narrow at this point, and abandoning
their evident intention of keeping straight up the lake, the thieves
seemed now bent on something else.

"I believe they're going to run ashore and get out!" cried Mr. Damon.

"If they do, it's just what I want," declared the lad.  "I don't care
for the men.  I want my boat back!"

The occupants of the ARROW were looking to the rear again, and
one--Happy Harry, Tom thought--shook his fist.

"Ah, wait until I get hold of you!" cried Mr. Damon, following his
example.  "I'll make you wish you'd behaved yourselves, you scoundrels!
Bless my overcoat!  Catch them if you can, Tom."

There was now no doubt of the intention of the fleeing ones.  The shore
was looming up ahead and straight for it was headed the ARROW.  Tom
sent Andy's boat in the same direction.  He was rapidly overhauling the
escaping ones now, for they had slowed down the motor.  Three minutes
later the foremost boat grated on the beach of the lake.  The men
leaped out, one of them pausing an instant in the bow.

"Here, don't you damage my boat!" cried Tom involuntarily, for the man
seemed to be hammering something.

The fellow leaped over the side, holding something in his hand.

"There they go!  Catch them!" yelled Mr. Damon.

"Let them go!" answered the lad as the men ran toward the wood.  "I
want my boat.  I'm afraid they've damaged her.  One of them tore
something from the bow."

At the same instant the two companions of the fellow who had paused in
the forward part of the ARROW saw that he had something in his hand.
With yells of rage they dashed at him, but he, shaking his fist at
them, plunged into the bushes and could be heard breaking his way
through, while his companions were in pursuit.

"They've quarreled among themselves," commented Mr. Damon as high and
angry voices could be heard from the woods.  "There's some mystery
here, Tom."

"I don't doubt it, but my first concern is for my boat.  I want to see
if they have damaged her."

Tom had run so closely in shore with the RED STREAK that he had to
reverse to avoid damaging the craft against the bank.  In a mass of
foam he stopped her in time, and then springing ashore, he hurried to
his motor-boat.




CHAPTER XIX

A QUIET CRUISE


"Have they done any damage?" asked Mr. Damon as he stood in the bow of
the RED STREAK.

Tom did not answer for a moment.  His trained eye was looking over the
engine.

"They yanked out the high tension wire instead of stopping the motor
with the switch," he answered at length, and then, when he had taken a
look into the compartment where the gasoline tank was, he added: "And
they've ripped out two more of the braces I put in.  Why in the world
they did that I can't imagine."

"That's evidently what one man had that the others wanted," was Mr.
Damon's opinion.

"Probably," agreed Tom.  "But what could he or they want with wooden
braces?"

That was a puzzler for Mr. Damon, but he answered:

"Perhaps they wanted to damage your boat and those two men were mad
because the other got ahead of them."

"Taking out the braces wouldn't do much damage.  I can easily put
others in.  All it would do would be to cause the tank to sag down and
maybe cause a leak in the pipe.  But that would be a queer thing to do.
No, I think there's some mystery that I haven't gotten to the bottom of
yet.  But I'm going to."

"Good!" exclaimed Mr. Damon.  "I'll help you.  But can you run your
boat back home?"

"Not without fixing it a bit.  I must brace up that tank and put in a
new high-tension wire from the spark coil.  I can do it here, but I'd
rather take it to the shop.  Besides, with two boats to run back, for I
must return Andy's to him, I don't see how I can do it very well unless
you operate one, Mr. Damon."

"Excuse me, but I can't do it.  Bless my slippers, but I would be sure
to run on a rock!  The best plan will be for you to tow your boat and
I'll ride in it and steer.  I can do that much, anyhow.  You can ride
in the RED STREAK."

Tom agreed that this would be a good plan.  So, after temporarily
bracing up the tank in the ARROW, it was shoved out into the lake and
attached to Andy's craft.

"But aren't you going to make a search for those men?" asked Mr. Damon
when Tom was ready to start back.

"No, I think it would be useless.  They are well away by this time, and
I don't fancy chasing them through the woods, especially as night is
coming on.  Besides, I won't leave these boats."

"No doubt you are right, but I would like to see them punished, and I
am curious enough to wish to know what object that scoundrel could have
in ripping out the blocks that served as a brace for the tank."

"I feel the same way myself," commented the lad, "especially since this
is the second time that's happened.  But we'll have to wait, I guess."

A little later the start back was made, Mr. Damon steering the ARROW
skillfully enough so that it did not drag on the leading boat, in which
Tom rode.  His course took him not far from the lake sanitarium, where
Mr. Duncan, the hunter, had been brought, and desiring to know how the
wounded man was getting on, the youth proposed that they make a halt,
explaining to Mr. Damon his reason.

"Yes, and while you're about it you'd better telephone your father that
you will join him to-morrow," suggested the other.  "I know what it is
to fret and worry.  You can fix your boat up in time to go to Sandport
to-morrow, can't you?"

"Yes, I'm glad you reminded me of it.  I'll telephone from the
sanitarium, if they'll let me."

Mr. Duncan was not at the institution, Tom was told, his injury having
healed sufficiently to allow of his being removed to his home.  The
youth readily secured permission to use the telephone, and was soon in
communication with Mr. Swift.  While not telling him all the
occurrences that had delayed him, Tom gave his father and Ned Newton
enough information to explain his absence.  Then the trip to Shopton
was resumed in the two boats.

"What are you going to do about your automobile?" asked Tom as they
neared the point where the machine had been left.

"Never mind about that," replied Mr. Damon.  "It will do it good to
have a night's vacation.  I will go on to your house with you, and
perhaps I can get a train back to my friend's home, so that I can claim
my car."

"Won't you stay all night with me?" invited the young inventor.  "I'd
be glad to have you."

Mr. Damon agreed, and, Tom putting more speed on the RED STREAK, was
soon opposite his own dock.  The ARROW was run in the boathouse and the
owner hastily told Mrs. Baggert and the engineer what had occurred.
Then he took Andy's boat to Mr. Foger's dock and warmly thanked the
red-haired lad for the use of his craft.

"Did you find your boat?" asked Andy eagerly.  "How did the RED STREAK
run?"

"I got my boat and yours runs fine," explained Tom.

"Good!  I'll race you again some day," declared Andy.

Mr. Damon enjoyed his visit at our hero's house, for Mrs. Baggert
cooked one of her best suppers for him.  Tom and the engineer spent the
evening repairing the motor-boat, Mr. Damon looking on and exclaiming
"Bless my shoe leather" or some other part of his dress or anatomy at
every stage of the work.  The engineer wanted to know all about the men
and their doings, but he could supply no reason for their queer actions
regarding the braces under the gasoline tank.

In the morning Tom once more prepared for an early start for Sandport,
and Mr. Damon, reconsidering his plans, rode as far with him as the
place where the automobile had been left.  There he took leave of the
young inventor, promising to call on Mr. Swift in the near future.

"I hope you arrive at the hotel where your father is without any more
accidents," remarked the automobilist.  "Bless my very existence, but
you seem to have the most remarkable series of adventures I ever heard
of!"

"They are rather odd," admitted Tom.  "I don't know that I particularly
care for them, either.  But, now that I have my boat back, I guess
everything will be all right."

But Tom could not look ahead.  He was destined to have still more
exciting times, as presently will be related.

Without further incident he arrived at the Lakeview Hotel in Sandport
that evening and found his father and Ned very glad to see him.  Of
course he had to explain everything then, and, with his son safely in
his sight, Mr. Swift was not so nervous over the recital as he would
have been had Tom not been present.

"Now for some nice, quiet trips," remarked the lad when he had finished
his account.  "I feel as if I had cheated you out of part of your
vacation, Ned, staying away as long as I did."

"Well, of course we missed you," answered his chum.  "But your father
and I had a good time."

"Yes, and I invented a new attachment for a kitchen boiler," added Mr.
Swift.  "I had a chance for it when I passed through the hotel kitchen
one day, for I wanted to see what kind of a range they used."

"I guess there's no stopping you from inventing," replied his son with
a laugh and a hopeless shake of the head.  "But don't let it happen
again when you go away to rest."

"Oh, I only just thought of it," said Mr. Swift.  "I haven't worked the
details out yet."

Then he wanted to know about everything at home and he seemed
particularly anxious lest the Happy Harry gang do some damage.

"I don't believe they will," Tom assured him.  "Garret and Mrs. Baggert
will be on guard."

The next few days were pleasant ones for Tom, his father and Ned
Newton.  They cruised about the lake, went fishing and camped in the
woods.  Even Mr. Swift spent one night in the tent and said he liked it
very much.  For a week the three led an ideal existence, going about as
they pleased, Ned taking a number of photographs with his new camera.
The ARROW proved herself a fine boat, and Tom and Ned, when Mr. Swift
did not accompany them, explored the seldom visited parts of Lake
Carlopa.

The three had been out one day and were discussing the necessity of
returning home soon when Ned spoke.

"I shall hate to give up this life and go to slaving in the bank
again," he complained.  "I wish I was an inventor."

"Oh, we inventors don't have such an easy time," said Mr. Swift.  "You
never know when trouble is coming," and he little imagined how near the
truth he was.

A little later they were at the hotel dock.  When Tom had tied up his
boat the three walked up the path to the broad veranda that faced the
lake.  A boy in uniform met them.

"Some one has just called you on the telephone, Mr. Swift," he reported.

"Some one wants me?  Who is it?"

"I think he said his name is Jackson, sir, Garret Jackson, and he says
the message is very important."

"Tom, something has happened at home!" exclaimed the inventor as he
hurried up the steps.  "I'm afraid there's bad news."

Unable to still the fear in his heart, Tom followed his father.




CHAPTER XX

NEWS OF A ROBBERY


With a hand that trembled so he could scarcely hold the receiver of the
telephone, Mr. Swift placed it to his ear.

"Hello! Hello!" he cried into the transmitter.  "Yes, this is Mr.
Swift--yes, Garret.  What is it?"

Then came a series of clicks, which Tom and Ned listened to.  The
inventor spoke again.

"What's that?  The same men?  Broke in early this evening?  Oh, that's
too bad!  Of course, I'll come at once."

There followed more meaningless clicks, which Tom wished he could
translate.  His father hung up the receiver, turned to him and
exclaimed:

"I've been robbed again!"

"Robbed again!  How, dad?"

"By that same rascally gang, Garret thinks.  This evening, when he and
Mrs. Baggert were in the house the burglar alarm went off.  The
indicator showed that the electrical shop had been entered, and the
engineer hurried there.  He saw a light inside and the shadows of
persons on the windows.  Before he could reach the shop, however, the
thieves heard him coming and escaped.  Oh, Tom, I should never have
come away!"

"But did they take anything, dad?  Perhaps Garret frightened them away
before they had a chance to steal any of your things.  Did you ask him
that?"

"I didn't need to.  He said he made a hasty exanimation before he
called me up, and he is sure a number of my electrical inventions are
missing.  Some of them are devices I never have had patented, and if I
lose them I will have no recovery."

"But just what ones are they?  Perhaps we can send out a police alarm
to-night."

"Garret couldn't tell that," answered Mr. Swift as he paced to and fro
in the hotel office.  "He doesn't know all the tools and machinery I
had in there.  But it is certain that some of my most valuable things
have been taken."

"Never mind.  Don't worry, dad," and Tom tried to speak soothingly, for
he saw that his father was much excited.  "We may be able to get them
back.  How does Garret know the same men who stole the turbine model
broke in the shop this evening?"

"He saw them.  One was Happy Harry, he is positive.  The others he did
not know, but he recognized the tramp from our description of him."

"Then we must tell the police at once."

"Yes, Tom, I wish you would telephone.  I'll give you a description of
the things.  No, I can't do that either, for I don't know what was
stolen.  I must go home at once to find out.  It's a good thing the
motor-boat is here.  Come, let's start at once.  What is my bill here?"
and the inventor turned to the hotel proprietor, who had come into the
office.  "I have suffered a severe loss and must leave at once."

"I am very sorry, sir.  I'll have it ready for you in a few minutes."

"All right.  Tom, is your boat ready for a quick trip?"

"Yes, dad, but I don't like to make it at night with three in.  Of
course it might be perfectly safe, but there's a risk, and I don't like
to take it."

"Don't worry about the risk on my account, Tom.  I'm not afraid.  I
must get home and see of what I have been robbed."

The young inventor was in a quandary.  He wanted to do as his father
requested and to aid him all he could, yet he knew that an all-night
trip in the boat down the lake would be dangerous, not only from the
chance of running on an unknown shore or into a hidden rock, but
because Mr. Swift was not physically fitted to stand the journey.

"Come, Tom," exclaimed the aged inventor impatiently, "we must start at
once!"

"Won't morning do as well, dad?"

"No, I must start now.  I could not sleep worrying over what has
happened.  We will start--"

At that instant there came a low, rumbling peal of thunder.  Mr. Swift
started and peered from a window.  There came a flash of lightning and
another vibrant report from the storm-charged clouds.

"There is your bill, Mr. Swift," remarked the proprietor, coming up,
"but I would not advise you to start to-night.  There is a bad storm in
the west, and it will reach here in a few minutes.  Storms on Lake
Carlopa, especially at this open and exposed end, are not to be
despised, I assure you."

"But I must get home!" insisted Tom's father.

The lace curtain over the window blew almost straight out with a sudden
breeze, and a flash of lightning so bright that it reflected even in
the room where the incandescent electrics were glowing made several
others jump.  Then came a mighty crash, and with that the flood-gates
of the storm were opened, and the rain came down in torrents.  Tom
actually breathed a sigh of relief.  The problem was solved for him.
It would be impossible to start to-night, and he was glad of it, much
as he wanted to get on the trail of the thieves.

There was a scurrying on the part of the hotel attendants to close the
windows, and the guests who had been enjoying the air out on the
porches came running in.  With a rush, a roar and a muttering, as peal
after peal of thunder sounded, the deluge continued.

"It's a good thing we didn't start," observed Ned.

"I should say so," agreed Tom.  "But we'll get off the first thing in
the morning, dad."

Mr. Swift did not reply, but his nervous pacing to and fro in the hotel
office showed how anxious he was to be at home again.  There was no
help for it, however, and, after a time, finding that to think of
reaching his house that night was out of the question, the inventor
calmed down somewhat.

The storm continued nearly all night, as Tom could bear witness, for he
did not sleep well, nor did his father.  And when he came down to
breakfast in the morning Mr. Swift plainly showed the effects of the
bad news.  His face was haggard and drawn and his eyes smarted and
burned from lack of sleep.

"Well, Tom, we must start early," he said nervously.  "I am glad it has
cleared off.  Is the boat all ready?"

"Yes, and it's a good thing it was under shelter last night or we'd
have to bail it out now, and that would delay us."

An hour later they were under way, having telephoned to the engineer at
the Swift home that they were coming.  Garret Jackson reported over the
wire that he had notified the Shopton police of the robbery, but that
little could be done until the inventor arrived to give a description
of the stolen articles.

"And that will do little good, I fear," remarked Tom.  "Those fellows
have evidently been planning this for some time and will cover their
tracks well.  I'd like to catch them, not only to recover your things,
dad, but to find out the mystery of my boat and why the man took the
tank braces."




CHAPTER XXI

THE BALLOON ON FIRE


Down Lake Carlopa speeded the ARROW, those on board watching the banks
slip past as the motor-boat rapidly cut through the water.

"What time do you think we ought to reach home, Tom?" asked Mr. Swift.

"Oh, about four o'clock, if we don't stop for lunch."

"Then we'll not stop," decided the inventor.  "We'll eat what we have
on board.  I suppose you have some rations?" and he smiled, the first
time since hearing the bad news.

"Oh, yes, Ned and I didn't eat everything on our camping trips," and
Tom was glad to note that the fine weather which followed the storm was
having a good effect on his father.

"We certainly had a good time," remarked Ned.  "I don't know when I've
enjoyed a vacation so."

"It's too bad it had to be cut short by this robbery," commented Mr.
Swift.

"Oh, well, my time would be up in a few days more," went on the young
bank employee.  "It's just as well to start back now."

Tom took the shortest route he knew, keeping in as close to shore as he
dared, for now he was as anxious to get home as was his father.  On and
on speeded the ARROW, yet fast as it was, it seemed slow to Mr. Swift,
who, like all nervous persons, always wanted to go wherever he desired
to go instantly.

Tom headed his boat around a little point of land, and was urging the
engine to the top notch of speed, for now he was on a clear course,
with no danger from shoals or hidden rocks, when he saw, darting out
from shore, a tiny craft which somehow seemed familiar to him.  He
recognized a peculiar put-putter of the motor.

"That's the DOT," he remarked in a low voice to Ned, "Miss Nestor's
cousin's boat."

"Is she in it now?" asked Ned.

"Yes," answered Tom quickly.

"You've got good eyesight," remarked Ned dryly, "to tell a girl at that
distance.  It looks to me like a boy."

"No, it's Mary--I mean Miss Nestor," the youth quickly corrected
himself, and a close observer would have noticed that he blushed a bit
under his coat of tan.

Ned laughed, Tom blushed still more, and Mr. Swift, who was in a stern
seat, glanced up quickly.

"It looks as if that boat wanted to hail us," the inventor remarked.

Tom was thinking the same thing, for, though he had changed his course
slightly since sighting the DOT, the little craft was put over so as to
meet him.  Wondering what Miss Nestor could want, but being only too
willing to have a chat with her, the young inventor shifted his helm.
In a short time the two craft were within hailing distance.

"How do you do?" called Miss Nestor, as she slowed down her motor.
"Don't you think I'm improving, Mr. Swift?"

"What's that?  I--er--I beg your pardon, but I didn't catch that,"
exclaimed the aged inventor quickly, coming out of a sort of day-dream.
"I beg your pardon."  He thought she had addressed him.

Miss Nestor blushed and looked questioningly at Tom.

"My father," he explained as he introduced his parent.  Ned needed
none, having met Miss Nestor before.  "Indeed you have improved very
much," went on our hero.  "You seem able to manage the boat all alone."

"Yes, I'm doing pretty well.  Dick lets me take the DOT whenever I want
to, and I thought I'd come out for a little trial run this morning.
I'm getting ready for the races.  I suppose you are going to enter
them?" and she steered her boat alongside Tom's, who throttled down his
powerful motor so as not to pass his friend.

"Races?  I hadn't heard of them," he replied.

"Oh, indeed there are to be fine ones under the auspices of the Lanton
Motor Club.  Mr. Hastings, of whom you bought that boat, is going to
enter his new CARLOPA, and Dick has entered the DOT, in the baby class
of course.  But I'm going to run it, and that's why I'm practicing."

"I hope you win," remarked Tom.  "I hadn't heard of the races, but I
think I'll enter.  I'm glad you told me.  Do you want to race now?" and
he laughed as he looked into the brown eyes of Mary Nestor.

"No, indeed, unless you give me a start of several miles."

They kept together for some little time longer, and then, as Tom knew
his father would be restless at the slow speed, he told Miss Nestor the
need of haste, and, advancing his timer, he soon left the DOT behind.
The girl called a laughing good-by and urged him not to forget the
races, which were to take place in about two weeks.

"I suppose Andy Foger will enter his boat," commented Ned.

"Naturally," agreed Tom.  "It's a racer, and he'll probably think it
can beat anything on the lake.  But if he doesn't manage his motor
differently, it won't."

The distance from Sandport to Shopton had been more than half covered
at noon, when the travelers ate a lunch in the boat.  Mr. Swift was
looking anxiously ahead to catch the first glimpse of his dock and Tom
was adjusting the machinery as finely as he dared to get out of it the
maximum speed.

Ned Newton, who happened to be gazing aloft, wondering at the perfect
beauty of the blue sky after the storm, uttered a sudden exclamation.
Then he arose and pointed at some object in the air.

"Look!" he cried, "A balloon!  It must have gone up from some fair."

Tom and his father looked upward.  High in the air, almost over their
heads, was an immense balloon.  It was of the hot-air variety, such as
performers use in which to make ascensions from fair grounds and
circuses, and below it dangled a trapeze, upon which could be observed
a man, only he looked more like a doll than a human being.

"I shouldn't like to be as high as that," remarked Ned.

"I would," answered Tom as he slowed down the engine the better to
watch the balloon.  "I'd like to go up in an airship, and I intend to
some day."

"I believe he's going to jump!" suddenly exclaimed Ned after a few
minutes.  "He's going to do something, anyhow."

"Probably come down in a parachute," said Tom.  "They generally do
that."

"No!  No!" cried Ned.  "He isn't going to jump.  Something has
happened!  The balloon is on fire!  He'll be burned to death!"

Horror stricken, they all gazed aloft.  From the mouth of the balloon
there shot a tongue of fire, and it was followed by a cloud of black
smoke.  The big bag was getting smaller and seemed to be descending,
while the man on the trapeze was hanging downward by his hands to get
as far as possible away from the terrible heat.




CHAPTER XXII

THE RESCUE


"Jump!  Jump!" cried Mr. Swift, leaping to his feet and motioning to
the man on the trapeze of the balloon.  But it is doubtful whether or
not the performer heard him.  Certainly he could not see the frantic
motions of the inventor.  "Why doesn't he jump?" Mr. Swift went on
piteously to the two lads.  "He'll surely be burned to death if he
hangs on there!"

"It's too far to leap!" exclaimed Tom.  "He's a good way up in the air,
though it looks like only a short distance.  He would be killed if he
dropped now."

"He ought to have a parachute," added Ned.  "Most of those men do when
they go up in a balloon.  Why doesn't he come down in that?  I wonder
how the balloon took fire?"

"Maybe he hasn't a parachute," suggested Tom, while he slowed down the
motor-boat still more so as to remain very nearly under the blazing
balloon.

"Yes, he has!" cried Ned.  "See, it's hanging to one side of the big
bag.  He ought to cut loose.  He could save himself then.  Why doesn't
he?"

The balloon was slowly twisting about, gradually settling to the
surface of the lake, but all the while the flames were becoming fiercer
and the black clouds of smoke increased in size.

"There, see the parachute!" went on Ned.

The twisting of the bag had brought into view the parachute or big,
umbrella-shaped bag, which would have enabled the man to safely drop to
the surface of the lake.  Without it he would have hit the water with
such force that he would have been killed as surely as if he had struck
the solid earth.  But the boys and Mr. Swift also saw something else,
and this was that the balloon was on fire on the same side where the
parachute was suspended.

"Look! Look!" shouted Tom, bringing his boat to a stop.  "That's why he
can't jump!  He can't reach the parachute!"

By this time the balloon had settled so low that the actions of the man
could be plainly seen. That he was in great agony of fear, as well as
in great pain from the terrific heat over his head was evident. He
shifted about on the trapeze bar, now hanging by one hand, so as to
bring his body a little farther below the blazing end of the bag, then,
when one arm tired, he would hang by the other. If the balloon would
only come down more quickly it would get to within such a short
distance of the water that the man could safely make the drop. But the
immense canvas bag was settling so slowly, for it was still very
buoyant, that considerable time must elapse before it would be near
enough to the water to make it safe for the unfortunate man to let go
the trapeze.

"Oh, if we could only do something!" cried Tom.  "We have to remain
here helpless and watch him burn to death.  It's awful!"

The three in the boat continued to gaze upward.  They could see the man
making frantic efforts to reach his parachute from time to time.  Once,
as a little current of air blew the flames and smoke to one side, he
thought he had a chance.  Up on the trapeze bar he pulled himself and
then edged along it in an endeavor to grasp the ring of the parachute.
Once he almost had hold of that and also the cord, which ran to a knife
blade.  This cord, being pulled, would sever the rope that bound it to
the balloon, and he would be comparatively safe, so he might drop to
the lake.  But, just as he was about to grasp the ring and cord the
smoke came swirling down on him and the hungry flames seemed to put out
their fiery tongues to devour him.  He had to slide back and once more
hung by his hands.

"I thought he was saved then," whispered Tom, and even the whisper
sounded loud in the silence.

Several men came running along the shore of the lake now.  They saw the
occupants in the ARROW and cried out:

"Why don't you save him?  Go to his rescue!"

"What can we do?" asked Ned quietly of his two friends, but he did not
trouble to answer the men on shore, who probably did not know what they
were saying.

The motor-boat had drifted from a spot under the unfortunate
balloonist, and at a word from his father the young inventor started
the engine and steered the craft back directly under the blazing bag
again.

"If he does drop, perhaps we may be able to pick him up," said Mr.
Swift.  "I wish we could save him!"

A cry from Ned startled Tom and his father, and their eyes, that had
momentarily been directed away from the burning bag high in the air,
were again turned toward it.

"The balloon is falling apart!" exclaimed Ned.  "It's all up with him
now!"

Indeed it did seem so, for pieces of the burning canvas, blazing and
smoking, were falling in a shower from the part of the bag already
consumed, and the fiery particles were fairly raining down on the man.
But he still had his wits about him, though his perilous position was
enough to make any one lose his mind, and he swung from side to side on
the bar, shifting skillfully with his hands and dodging the larger
particles of blazing canvas.  When some small sparks fell on his
clothing he beat them out with one hand, while with the other he clung
to the trapeze.

There was scarcely any wind or the man's plight might have been more
bearable, for the current of air would have carried the smoke and fire
to one side.  As it was, most of the smoke and flames went straight up,
save now and then, when a draught created by the heat would swirl the
black clouds down on the performer, hiding him from sight for a second
or two.  A breeze would have carried the sparks away instead of letting
them fall on him.

Nearer and nearer to the surface of the lake sank the balloon.  By this
time the crowd on the bank had increased and there were excited
opinions as to what was best to do.  But the trouble was that little
could be done.  If the man could hold out until he got near enough to
the water to let go he might yet be saved, but this would not be for
some time at the present rate the balloon was falling.  The performer
realized this, and, as the fire was getting hotter, he made another
desperate attempt to reach the parachute.  It was unavailing and he had
to drop back, hanging below the slender bar.

Suddenly there came a puff of wind, fanning the faces of those in the
motor-boat, and they looked intently to observe if there was any
current as high as was the balloonist.  They saw the big bag sway to
one side and the flames broke out more fiercely as they caught the
draught.  The balloon moved slowly down the lake.

"Keep after it, Tom!" urged his father.  "We may be able to save him!"

The lad increased the speed of his engine and Ned, who was at the
wheel, gave it a little twist.  Then, with a suddenness that was
startling, the blazing canvas airship began to settle swiftly toward
the water.  It had lost much of its buoyancy.

"Now he can jump!  He's near enough to the water now!" cried Tom.

But a new danger arose.  True, the balloon was rapidly approaching the
surface of the lake and in a few seconds more would be within such a
short distance that a leap would not be fatal.  But the burning bag was
coming straight down and scarcely would the man be in the water ere the
fiery canvas mass would be on top of him.

In such an event he would either be burned to death or so held down
that drowning must quickly follow.

"If there was only wind enough to carry the balloon beyond him after he
jumped he could do it safely!" cried Ned.

Tom said nothing.  He was measuring, with, his eye, the distance the
balloon had yet to go and also the distance away the motor-boat was
from where it would probably land.

"He can do it!" exclaimed the young inventor.

"How?" asked his father.

For answer Tom caught up a newspaper he had purchased at the hotel that
morning.  Rolling it quickly into a cone, so that it formed a rough
megaphone, he put the smaller end to his mouth, and, pointing the
larger opening at the balloonist, he called out:

"Drop into the lake!  We'll pick you up before the bag falls on you!
Jump!  Let go now!"

The balloonist heard and understood.  So did Ned and Mr. Swift.  Tom's
quick wit had found a way to save the man.

Faster and faster the blazing bag settled toward the surface of the
water.  It was now merely a mushroom-shaped piece of burning and
smoking canvas, yet it was supporting the man almost as a parachute
would have done.

With one look upward to the burning mass above him and a glance
downward to the lake, the aeronaut let go his hold.  Like a shot he
came down, holding his body rigid and straight as a stick, for he knew
how to fall into water, did that balloonist.

Tom Swift was ready for him.  No sooner had the lad called his
directions through the megaphone than the young inventor had speeded up
his engine to the top notch.

"Steer so as to pick him up!" Tom cried to Ned, who was at the wheel.
"Pass by him on a curve, and, as soon as I grab him, put the wheel over
so as to get out from under the balloon."

It was a risky thing to do, but our hero had it all planned out.  He
made a loop of the boat's painter, and, hurrying to the bow, leaned
over as far as he could, holding the rope in readiness.  His idea was
to have the balloonist grab the strands and be pulled out of danger by
the speedy motor-boat, for the blazing canvas would cover such an
extent of water that the man could not have swum out of the danger zone
in time.

Down shot the balloonist and down more slowly settled the collapsed
bag, yet not so slowly that there was any time to spare.  It needed
only a few seconds to drop over the performer, to burn and smother him.

Into the water splashed the man, disappearing from sight as when a
stick is dropped in, point first.  Ned was alert and steered the boat
to the side in which the man's face was, for he concluded that the
aeronaut would strike out in that direction when he came up.  The ARROW
was now directly under the blazing balloon and cries of fear from the
watchers on shore urged upon Tom and his companions the danger of their
position.  But they had to take some risk to rescue the man.

"There he is!" cried Mr. Swift, who was on the watch, leaning over the
side of the boat.  Tom and Ned saw him at the same instant.  Ned
shifted his wheel and the young inventor bent over, holding out the
rope for the man to grasp.  He saw it and struck out toward the ARROW.
But there was no need for him to go far.  An instant more and the
speeding motor-boat shot past him.  He grabbed the rope and Tom, aided
by Mr. Swift, began to lift him out of the water.

"Quick!  To one side, Ned!" yelled Tom, for the heat of the descending
mass of burning canvas struck him like a furnace blast.

Ned needed no urging.  With a swirl of the screw the ARROW shot herself
out of the way, carrying the aeronaut with her.  A moment later the
burning balloon, or what there was left of it, settled down into the
lake, hissing angrily as the fire was quenched by the water and
completely covering the spot where, but a few seconds before, the man
had been swimming.  He had been saved in the nick of time.




CHAPTER XXIII

PLANS FOR AN AIRSHIP


"Slow her down, Ned!" cried Tom, for the ARROW was shooting so swiftly
through the water that the young inventor found it impossible to pull
up the balloonist.  Ned hurried back to the motor, and, when the boat's
way had been checked, it was an easy matter to pull the dripping and
almost exhausted man into the craft.

"Are you much hurt?" asked Mr. Swift anxiously, for Tom was too much
out of breath with his exertion to ask any questions.  For that matter
the man was in almost as bad a plight.  He was breathing heavily, as
one who had run a long race.

"I--I guess I'm all right," he panted.  "Only burned a little on my
hands.  That--that was a close call!"

The boat swung around and headed for shore, on which was quite a throng
of persons.  Some of them had cheered when they saw the plucky rescue.

"I'm afraid we can't save your balloon," gasped Tom as he looked at the
place where the canvas was still floating and burning.

"No matter.  It wasn't worth much.  That's the last time I'll ever go
up in a hot-air balloon," said the man with more energy than he had
before exhibited.  "I'm done with 'em.  I've had my lesson.  Hereafter
an aeroplane or a gas balloon for me.  I only did this to oblige the
fair committee.  I'll not do it again."

The man spoke in short, crisp sentences, as though he was in too much
of a hurry to waste his words.

"Let it sink," he went on.  "It's no good.  Glad to see the last of it."

Almost as he spoke, with a final hiss and a cloud of steam that mingled
with the black smoke, the remains of the big bag sunk beneath the
surface of the lake.

"We must get you ashore at once and to a doctor," said Mr. Swift.  "You
must be badly burned."

"Not much.  Only my hands, where some burning pieces of canvas fell on'
em.  If I had a little oil to put on I'd be all right."

"I can fix you up better than that," put in Tom.  "I have some
Vaseline."

"Good!  Just the thing.  Pass it over," and the man, though he spoke
shortly, seemed grateful for the offer.  "My name's Sharp," he went on,
"John Sharp, of no place in particular, for I travel all over.  I'm a
professional balloonist.  Ha!  That's the stuff!"

This last was in reference to a bottle of Vaseline, which Tom produced.
Mr. Sharp spread some over the backs of his hands and went on:

"That's better.  Much obliged.  I can't begin to thank you for what you
did for me--saved my life.  I thought it was all up with me--would have
been but for you.  Mustn't mind my manner--it's a way I have--have to
talk quick when you're balloonin'--no time--but I'm grateful all the
same.  Who might you people be?"

Tom told him their names and Mr. Swift asked the aeronaut if he was
sure he didn't need the services of a physician.

"No doctor for me," answered the balloonist.  "I've been in lots of
tight places, but this was the worst squeeze.  If you'll put me ashore,
I guess I can manage now."

"But you're all wet," objected Tom.  "Where will you go?  You need some
other clothes," for the man wore a suit of tights and spangles.

"Oh, I'm used to this," went on the performer.  "I frequently have to
fall in the water.  I always carry a little money with me so as to get
back to the place where I started from.  By the way, where am I?"

"Opposite Daleton," answered Tom.  "Where did you go up from?"

"Pratonia.  Big fair there.  I was one of the features."

"Then you're about fifteen miles away," commented Mr. Swift.  "You can
hardly get back before night.  Must you go there?"

"Left my clothes there.  Also a valuable gas balloon.  No more hot-air
ones for me.  Guess I'd better go back," and the aeronaut continued to
speak in his quick, jerky sentences.

"We'd be very glad to have you come with us, Mr. Sharp," went on the
inventor.  "We are not far from Shopton, and if you would like to
remain over night I'm sure we would make you comfortable.  You can
proceed to Pratonia in the morning."

"Thanks.  Might not be a bad idea," said Mr. Sharp.  "I'm obliged to
you.  I've got to go there to collect my money, though I suppose they
won't give it all to me."

"Why not?" demanded Ned.

"Didn't drop from my parachute.  Couldn't.  Fire was one
reason--couldn't reach the parachute, and if I could have, guess it
wouldn't have been safe.  Parachute probably was burned too.  But I'm
done with hot-air balloons though I guess I said that before."

The boys were much interested in the somewhat odd performer, and, on
his part, he seemed to take quite a notion to Tom, who told him of
several things that he had invented. "Well," remarked Mr. Swift after a
while, during which the boat had been moving slowly down the lake, "if
we are not to go ashore for a doctor for you, Mr. Sharp, suppose we put
on more speed and get to my home? I'm anxious about a robbery that
occurred there," and he related some facts in the case.

"Speed her up!" exclaimed Mr. Sharp.  "Wish I could help you catch the
scoundrels, but afraid I can't--hands too sore," and he looked at his
burns.  Then he told how he had made the ascension from the Pratonia
fair grounds and how, when he was high in the air, he had discovered
that the balloon was on fire.  He described his sensations and told how
he thought his time had surely come.  Sparks from the hot air used to
inflate it probably caused the blaze, he said.

"I've made a number of trips," he concluded, "hot air and gas bags, but
this was the worst ever.  It got on my nerves for a few minutes," he
added coolly.

"I should think it would," agreed Tom as he speeded up the motor and
sent the ARROW on her homeward way.

The boys and Mr. Swift were much interested in the experiences of the
balloonist and asked him many questions, which he answered modestly.
Several hours passed and late that afternoon the party approached
Shopton.

"Here we are!" exclaimed Mr. Swift, relief in his tones.  "Now to see
of what I have been robbed and to get the police after the scoundrels!"

When the boat was nearing the dock Mr. Sharp, who had been silent for
some time, suddenly turned to Tom and asked:

"Ever invent an airship?"

"No," replied the lad, somewhat surprised.  "I never did."

"I have," went on the balloonist.  "That is, I've invented part of it.
I'm stuck over some details.  Maybe you and I'll finish it some day.
How about it?"

"Maybe," assented Tom, who was occupied just then in making a good
landing.  "I am interested in airships, but I never thought I could
build one."

"Easiest thing in the world," went on Mr. Sharp, as if it was an
everyday matter.  "You and I will get busy as soon as we clear up this
robbery."  He talked as though he had been a friend of the family for
some time, for he had a genial, taking manner.

A little later Mr. Swift was excitedly questioning Garret Jackson
concerning the robbery and making an examination of the electrical shop
to discover what was missing.

"They've taken some parts of my gyroscope!" he exclaimed, "and some
valuable tools and papers, as well as some unfinished work that will be
difficult to replace."

"Much of a loss?" asked Mr. Sharp with a business-like air.

"Well, not so large as regards money," answered the inventor, "but they
took things I can never replace, and I will miss them very much if I
cannot get them back."

"Then we'll get them back!" snapped the balloonist, as if that was all
there was to it.

The police were called up on the telephone and the facts given to them,
as well as a description of the stolen things.  They promised to do
what they could, but, in the light of past experiences, Tom and his
father did not think this would be much.  There was little more that
could be done that evening.  Ned Newton went to his home, and, after
Mr. Swift had insisted in calling in his physician to look after Mr.
Sharp's burns the balloonist was given a room next to Tom's.  Then the
Swift household settled down.

"Well," remarked Tom to his father, as he got ready for bed, "this sure
has been an exciting day."

"And my loss is a serious one," added the inventor somewhat sadly.

"Don't worry, dad," begged his son.  "I'll do my best to recover those
things for you."

Several days passed, but there was no clew to the thieves.  That they
were the same ones who had stolen the turbine model there was little
doubt, but they seemed to have covered their tracks well.  The police
were at a loss, and, though Tom and Mr. Sharp cruised about the lake,
they could get no trace of the men.  The balloonist had sent to
Pratonia for his clothing and other baggage and was now installed in
the Swift home, where he was invited to stay a week or two.

One night when he was looking over some papers he had taken from his
trunk the balloonist came over to where Tom was making a drawing of a
new machine he was planning and said:

"Like to see my idea for an airship?  Different from some.  It's a
dirigible balloon with an aeroplane front and rear to steer and balance
it in big winds.  It would be a winner, only for one thing.  Maybe you
can help me."

"Maybe I can," agreed Tom, who was at once interested.

"We ought to be able to do something.  Look at our names--Swift and
Sharp--quick and penetrating--a good firm to build airships," and he
laughed genially.  "Shall we do it?"

"I'm willing," agreed Tom, and the balloonist spread his plans out on
the table, he and the young inventor soon being deep in a discussion of
them.




CHAPTER XXIV

THE MYSTERY SOLVED


From then on, for several days, the young inventor and his new friend
lived in an atmosphere of airships.  They talked them from morning
until night, and even Mr. Swift, much as he was exercised over his
loss, took part in the discussions.

In the meanwhile efforts had not ceased to locate the robbers and
recover the stolen goods, but so far without success.

One afternoon, about two weeks after the thrilling rescue of John
Sharp, Tom said to the balloonist:

"Wouldn't you like to come for a ride in the motor-boat?  Maybe it will
help us to solve the puzzle of the airship.  We'll take a trip across
and up the opposite shore."

"Good idea," commented Mr. Sharp.  "Fine day for a sail.  Come on.
Blow the cobwebs from our brains."

Mr. Swift declined an invitation to accompany them, as he said he would
stay home and try to straighten out his affairs, which were somewhat
muddled by the robbery.

Out over the blue waters of Lake Carlopa shot the ARROW.  It was making
only moderate speed, as Tom was in no hurry, and he knew his engine
would last longer if not forced too frequently.  They glided along,
crossed the lake and were proceeding up the opposite shore when, as
they turned out from a little bay and rounded a point of land, Mr.
Sharp exclaimed:

"Look out, Tom, there's rowboat just ahead!"

"Oh, I'll pass well to one side of that," answered the young inventor,
looking at the craft.  As he did so, noting that there were four men in
it, one of the occupants caught a glimpse of the ARROW.  No sooner had
he done so than he spoke to his companions, and they all turned to
stare at Tom.  At first the lad could scarcely believe his eyes, but as
he looked more intently he uttered a cry.

"There they are!"

"Who?" inquired Mr. Sharp.

"Those men--the thieves!  We must catch them!"

Tom had spoken loudly, but even though the men in the rowboat did hear
what he said, they would have realized without that that they were
about to be pursued, for there was no mistaking the attitude of our
hero.

Two of the thieves were at the oars, and, with one accord, they at once
increased their speed.  The boat swung about sharply and was headed for
the shore, which they seemed to have come from only a short time
previous, as the craft was not far out in the lake.

"No, you don't!" cried Tom. "I see your game!  You want to get to the
woods, where you'll have a better chance to escape!  If this isn't
great luck, coming upon them this way!"

It was the work of but a moment to speed up the engine and head the
ARROW for the rowboat.  The men were pulling frantically, but they had
no chance.

"Get between them and the shore!" cried Mr. Sharp. "You can head them
off then." This was good advice and Tom followed it. The men, among
whom the lad could recognize Happy Harry and Anson Morse, were all
excited. Two of them stood up, as though to jump overboard, but their
companions called to them to stop.

"If we only had a gun now, not to shoot at them but to intimidate
them," murmured the balloonist, "maybe they'd stop."

"Here's one," answered Tom, pointing to the seat locker, where he kept
the shotgun Mr. Duncan had given him.  In a moment Mr. Sharp had it out.

"Surrender!" he cried, pointing the weapon at the men in the small boat.

"Don't shoot!  Don't fire on us!  We'll give up!" cried Happy Harry,
and the two with the oars ceased pulling.

"Don't take any chances," urged Mr. Sharp in a low voice.  "Keep
between them and the shore.  I'll cover them."  Tom was steering from
an auxiliary side wheel near the motor, and soon the ARROW had cut off
the retreat of the men.  They could not land and to row across the lake
meant speedy capture.

"Well, what do you want of us?" growled Morse.  "What right have you
got to interfere with us in this fashion?"

"The best of right," answered Tom.  "You'll find out when you're landed
in jail."

"You can't arrest us," sneered Happy Harry.  "You're not an officer and
you haven't any warrant."

Tom hadn't thought of that, and his chagrin showed in his face.  Happy
Harry was quick to see it.

"You'd better let us go," he threatened "We can have you arrested for
bothering us.  You haven't any right to stop us, Tom Swift."

"Maybe he hasn't, but I have!" exclaimed John Sharp suddenly.

"You!  Who are you?" demanded Featherton, alias Simpson, the man who
had run the automobile that carried Tom away.

"Me.  I'm a special deputy sheriff for this county," answered the
balloonist simply.  "Here's my badge," and, throwing back his coat, he
displayed it.  "You see I got the appointment in order to have some
authority in the crowds that gather to watch me go up," he explained to
Tom, who plainly showed his astonishment.  "I found it very useful to
be able to threaten arrest, but in this case I'll do more than
threaten.  You are my prisoners," he went on to the men in the boat,
and he handled the shotgun as if he knew how to use it.  "I'll take you
into custody on complaint of Mr. Swift for robbery.  Now will you go
quietly or are you going to make a fuss?" and Mr. Sharp shut his jaw
grimly.

"Well, seeing as how you have the drop on us, I guess we'll have to do
as you say," admitted Happy Harry, alias Jim Burke.  "But you can't
prove anything against us.  We haven't any of Mr. Swift's property."

"Well, you know where it is then," retorted Tom quickly.

Under the restraining influence of the gun the men made no resistance.
While Mr. Sharp covered them, Tom towed their boat toward shore.  Then,
while the young inventor held the gun, the balloonist tied the hands
and feet of the thieves in a most scientific manner, for what he did
not know about ropes and knots was not worth putting into a book.

"Now, I guess they'll stay quiet for a while," remarked Mr. Sharp as he
surveyed the crestfallen criminals.  "I'll remain on guard here, Tom,
while you go notify the nearest constable and we'll take them to jail.
We bagged the whole lot as neatly as could be desired."

"No, you didn't get all of us!" exclaimed Happy Harry, and there was a
savage anger in his tones.

"Keep quiet!" urged Morse.

"No, I'll not keep quiet!  It's a shame that we have to take our
medicine while that trimmer, Tod Boreck, goes free.  He ought to have
been with us, and he would be, only he's trying to get away with that
sparkler!"

"Keep quiet," again urged Morse.

Tom was all attention.  He had caught the word "sparkler," and he at
once associated it with the occasion he had heard the men use it
before.  He felt that he was on the track of solving the mystery
connected with his boat.

He looked at the men.  They were the same four who had been involved in
the former theft--Appleson, Featherton, Morse and Burke.  Were there
five of them?  He recalled the man who had been caught tampering with
his boat--the man who had tried to bid on the ARROW at the auction.
Where was he?

"Boreck didn't get what he was after," resumed Happy Harry, "and I'm
going to spoil his game for him.  Say, kid," he went on to Tom, "look
in the front part of your boat--where the gasoline tank is."

Tom felt his heart beating fast.  At last he felt that he would solve
the puzzle.  He opened the forward compartment.  To his disappointment
it seemed as usual.  Morse and the others were making a vain effort to
silence Happy Harry.

"I don't see anything here," said Tom.

"No, because it's hidden in one of those blocks of wood you use for a
brace," continued the man.  "Which one it is, Boreck didn't know, so he
pulled out two or three, only to be fooled each time.  You must have
shifted them, kid, from the way they were when we had the boat."

"I did," answered the young inventor, recollecting how he had taken out
some of the braces and inserted new ones, then painted the interior of
the compartment.  "What is in the braces, anyhow?"

"The sparkler--a big diamond--in a hollow place in the wood, kid!"
exclaimed Happy Harry, blurting out the words.  "I'm not going to let
Tod Boreck get away with it while we stay in jail."

"Take out all the braces that haven't been moved and have a look,"
suggested Mr. Sharp.  Tom only had to remove two, those farthest back,
for all the others had, at one time or another, been changed or taken
away by the thief.

One of the blocks did not seem to have anything unusual about it, but
at the sight of the other Tom could not repress a cry.  It was the one
that seemed to have had a hole bored in it and then plugged up again.
He remembered his father noticing it on the occasion of overhauling the
boat.

"The sparkler's in there," said the tramp as he saw the brace.  "Boreck
was after it several times, but he never pulled out the right one."

With his knife Tom dug out the putty that covered the round hole in the
block.  No sooner had he done so than there rolled out into his hand a
white object.  It was something done up in tissue paper, and as he
removed the wrapper, there was a flash in the sunlight and a large,
beautiful diamond was revealed.  The mystery had been solved.




CHAPTER XXV

WINNING A RACE


"Where did this diamond come from?" demanded Mr. Sharp of the quartette
of criminals.

"That's for us to know and you to find out," sneered Happy Harry.  "I
don't care as long as that trimmer Boreck didn't get it.  He tried to
do us out of our share."

"Well, I guess the police will make you tell," went on the balloonist.
"Go for the constable, Tom."

Leaving his friend to guard the ugly men, who for a time at least were
beyond the possibility of doing harm, Tom hurried off through the woods
to the nearest village.  There he found an officer and the gang was
soon lodged in jail.  The diamond was turned over to the authorities,
who said they would soon locate the owner.

Nor were they long in doing it, for it appeared the gem was part of a
large jewel robbery that had taken place some time before in a distant
city.  The Happy Harry gang, as the men came to be called, were
implicated in it, though they got only a small share of the plunder.
Search was made for Tod Boreck and he was captured about a week after
his companions.  Seeing that their game was up, the men made a partial
confession, telling where Mr. Swift's goods had been secreted, and the
inventor's valuable tools, papers and machinery were recovered, no
damage having been done to them.

It developed that after the diamond theft, and when the gang still had
possession of Mr. Hastings' boat, Boreck, sometimes called Murdock by
his cronies, unknown to them, had secreted the jewel in one of the
braces under the gasoline tank.  He expected to get it out secretly,
but the capture of the gang and the sale of the boat prevented this.
Then he tried to buy the craft to take out the diamond, but Tom overbid
him.  It was Boreck who found Andy's bunch of keys and used one to open
the compartment lock when Tom surprised him.  The man did manage to
remove some of the blocks, thinking he had the one with the diamond in
it, but the fact of Tom changing them, and painting the compartment
deceived him.  The gang hoped to get some valuables from Mr. Swift's
shops, and, to a certain extent, succeeded after hanging around for
several nights and following him to Sandport, but Tom eventually proved
too much for them.  Even stealing the Arrow, which was taken to aid the
gang in robbing Mr. Swift, did not succeed, and Boreck's plan then to
get possession of the diamond fell through.

It was thought that the gang would get long terms in prison, but one
night, during a violent storm, they escaped from the local jail and
that was the last seen of them for some time.

A few days after the capture as Tom was in the boathouse making some
minor repairs to the motor he heard a voice calling:

"Mistah Swift, am yo' about?"

"Hello, Rad, is that you?" he inquired, recognizing the voice of the
colored owner of the mule Boomerang.

"Yais, sa, dat's me.  I got a lettah fo' yo'.  I were passin' de
post-office an' de clerk asted me to brung it to yo' 'case as how it's
marked 'hurry,' an' he said he hadn't seen yo' to-day."

"That's right.  I've been so busy I haven't had time to go for the
mail," and Tom took the letter, giving Eradicate ten cents for his
trouble.

"Ha, that's good!" exclaimed Tom as he read it.

"Hab some one done gone an' left yo' a fortune, Mistah Swift?" asked
the negro.

"No, but it's almost as good.  It's an invitation to take part in the
motor-boat races next week.  I'd forgotten all about them.  I must get
ready."

"Good land!  Dat's all de risin' generation t'inks about now," observed
Eradicate, "racin' an' goin' fast.  Mah ole mule Boomerang am good
enough fo' me," and, shaking his head in a woeful manner, Eradicate
went on his way.

Tom told Mr. Sharp and his father of the proposed races of the Lanton
Motor-boat Club, and, as it was required that two persons be in a craft
the size of the ARROW, the young inventor arranged for the balloonist
to accompany him.  Our hero spent the next few days in tuning up his
motor and in getting the ARROW ready for the contest.

The races took place on that side of Lake Carlopa near where Mr.
Hastings lived, and he was one of the officials of the club.  There
were several classes, graded according to the horsepower of the motors,
and Tom found himself in a class with Andy Foger.

"Here's where I beat you," boasted the red-haired youth exultantly,
though his manner toward Tom was more temperate than usual.  Andy had
learned a lesson.

"Well, if you can beat me I'll give you credit for it," answered Tom.

The first race was for high-powered craft, and in this Mr. Hastings'
new CARLOPA won.  Then came the trial of the small boats, and Tom was
pleased to note that Miss Nestor was on hand in the tiny DOT.

"Good luck!" he called to her as he was adjusting his timer, for his
turn would come soon.  "Remember what I told you about the spark," for
he had given her a few lessons.

"If I win it will be due to you," she called brightly.

She did win, coming in ahead of several confident lads who had better
boats.  But Miss Nestor handled the DOT to perfection and crossed the
line a boat's length ahead of her nearest competitor.

"Fine!" cried Tom, and then came the warning gun that told him to get
ready for his trial.

This was a five-mile race and had several entrants.  The affair was a
handicap one and Tom had no reason to complain of the rating allowed
him.

"Crack!" went the starting pistol and away went Tom and one or two
others who had the same allowance as did he.  A little later the others
started and finally the last class, including Andy Foger.  The RED
STREAK shot ahead and was soon in the lead, for Andy and Sam had
learned better how to handle their craft.  Tom and Mr. Sharp were
worried, but they stuck grimly to the race and when the turning stake
was reached Tom's motor had so warmed up and was running so well that
he crept up on Andy.  A mile from the final mark Andy and Tom were on
even terms, and though the red-haired lad tried to shake off his rival
he could not.  Andy's ignition system failed him several times and he
changed from batteries to magneto and back again in the hope of getting
a little more speed out of the motor.

But it was not to be.  A half-mile away from the finish Tom, who had
fallen behind a little, crept up on even terms.  Then he slowly forged
ahead, and, a hundred rods from the stake, the young inventor knew that
the race was his.  He clinched it a few minutes later, crossing the
line amid a burst of cheers.  The ARROW had beaten several boats out of
her own class and Tom was very proud and happy.

"My, but we certainly did scoot along some!" cried Mr. Sharp.  "But
that's nothing to how we'll go when we build our airship, eh, Tom?" and
he looked at the flushed face of the lad.

"No, indeed," agreed the young inventor.  "But I don't know that we'll
take part in any races in it.  We'll build it, however, as soon as we
can solve that one difficulty."

They did solve it, as will be told in the next book of this series, to
be called "Tom Swift and His Airship; or, The Stirring Cruise of the
RED CLOUD."  They had some remarkable adventures in the wonderful
craft, and solved the mystery of a great bank robbery.

This ended the contests of the motor-boats and the little fleet crowded
up to the floats and docks, where the prizes were to be awarded.  Tom
received a handsome silver cup and Miss Nestor a gold bracelet.

"Now I want all the contestants, winners and losers, to come up to my
house and have lunch," invited Mr. Hastings.

As Tom and the balloonist strolled up the walk to the handsome house
Andy Foger passed them.

"You wouldn't have beaten me if my spark coil hadn't gone back on me,"
he said, somewhat sneeringly.

"Maybe," admitted Tom, and just then he caught sight of Mary Nestor.
"May I take you in to lunch?" he asked.

"Yes," she said, "because you helped me to win," and she blushed
prettily.  And then they all sat down to the tables set out on the
lawn, while Tom looked so often at Mary Nestor that Mr. Sharp said
afterward it was a wonder he found time to eat.  But Tom didn't care.
He was happy.

========================================
